[United States Statutes at Large, Volume 124, 111th Congress, 2nd Session]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov]


Public Law 111-163
111th Congress

An Act


 
To amend title 38, United States Code, to provide assistance to
caregivers of veterans, to improve the provision of health care to
veterans, and for other purposes. <>

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, <>
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

(a) <>  Short Title.--This Act may be cited
as the ``Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services Act of 2010''.

(b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. References to title 38, United States Code.

TITLE I--CAREGIVER SUPPORT

Sec. 101. Assistance and support services for caregivers.
Sec. 102. Medical care for family caregivers.
Sec. 103. Counseling and mental health services for caregivers.
Sec. 104. Lodging and subsistence for attendants.

TITLE II--WOMEN VETERANS HEALTH CARE MATTERS

Sec. 201. Study of barriers for women veterans to health care from the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 202. Training and certification for mental health care providers of
the Department of Veterans Affairs on care for veterans
suffering from sexual trauma and post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Sec. 203. Pilot program on counseling in retreat settings for women
veterans newly separated from service in the Armed Forces.
Sec. 204. Service on certain advisory committees of women recently
separated from service in the Armed Forces.
Sec. 205. Pilot program on assistance for child care for certain
veterans receiving health care.
Sec. 206. Care for newborn children of women veterans receiving
maternity care.

TITLE III--RURAL HEALTH IMPROVEMENTS

Sec. 301. Improvements to the Education Debt Reduction Program.
Sec. 302. Visual impairment and orientation and mobility professionals
education assistance program.
Sec. 303. Demonstration projects on alternatives for expanding care for
veterans in rural areas.
Sec. 304. Program on readjustment and mental health care services for
veterans who served in Operation Enduring Freedom and
Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Sec. 305. Travel reimbursement for veterans receiving treatment at
facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 306. Pilot program on incentives for physicians who assume
inpatient responsibilities at community hospitals in health
professional shortage areas.
Sec. 307. Grants for veterans service organizations for transportation
of highly rural veterans.
Sec. 308. Modification of eligibility for participation in pilot program
of enhanced contract care authority for health care needs of
certain veterans.

[[Page 1131]]

TITLE IV--MENTAL HEALTH CARE MATTERS

Sec. 401. Eligibility of members of the Armed Forces who serve in
Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom for
counseling and services through Readjustment Counseling
Service.
Sec. 402. Restoration of authority of Readjustment Counseling Service to
provide referral and other assistance upon request to former
members of the Armed Forces not authorized counseling.
Sec. 403. Study on suicides among veterans.

TITLE V--OTHER HEALTH CARE MATTERS

Sec. 501. Repeal of certain annual reporting requirements.
Sec. 502. Submittal date of annual report on Gulf War research.
Sec. 503. Payment for care furnished to CHAMPVA beneficiaries.
Sec. 504. Disclosure of patient treatment information from medical
records of patients lacking decisionmaking capacity.
Sec. 505. Enhancement of quality management.
Sec. 506. Pilot program on use of community-based organizations and
local and State government entities to ensure that veterans
receive care and benefits for which they are eligible.
Sec. 507. Specialized residential care and rehabilitation for certain
veterans.
Sec. 508. Expanded study on the health impact of Project Shipboard
Hazard and Defense.
Sec. 509. Use of non-Department facilities for rehabilitation of
individuals with traumatic brain injury.
Sec. 510. Pilot program on provision of dental insurance plans to
veterans and survivors and dependents of veterans.
Sec. 511. Prohibition on collection of copayments from veterans who are
catastrophically disabled.
Sec. 512. Higher priority status for certain veterans who are medal of
honor recipients.
Sec. 513. Hospital care, medical services, and nursing home care for
certain Vietnam-era veterans exposed to herbicide and
veterans of the Persian Gulf War.
Sec. 514. Establishment of Director of Physician Assistant Services in
Veterans Health Administration.
Sec. 515. Committee on Care of Veterans with Traumatic Brain Injury.
Sec. 516. Increase in amount available to disabled veterans for
improvements and structural alterations furnished as part of
home health services.
Sec. 517. Extension of statutorily defined copayments for certain
veterans for hospital care and nursing home care.
Sec. 518. Extension of authority to recover cost of certain care and
services from disabled veterans with health-plan contracts.

TITLE VI--DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL MATTERS

Sec. 601. Enhancement of authorities for retention of medical
professionals.
Sec. 602. Limitations on overtime duty, weekend duty, and alternative
work schedules for nurses.
Sec. 603. Reauthorization of health professionals educational assistance
scholarship program.
Sec. 604. Loan repayment program for clinical researchers from
disadvantaged backgrounds.

TITLE VII--HOMELESS VETERANS MATTERS

Sec. 701. Per diem grant payments to nonconforming entities.

TITLE VIII--NONPROFIT RESEARCH AND EDUCATION CORPORATIONS

Sec. 801. General authorities on establishment of corporations.
Sec. 802. Clarification of purposes of corporations.
Sec. 803. Modification of requirements for boards of directors of
corporations.
Sec. 804. Clarification of powers of corporations.
Sec. 805. Redesignation of section 7364A of title 38, United States
Code.
Sec. 806. Improved accountability and oversight of corporations.

TITLE IX--CONSTRUCTION AND NAMING MATTERS

Sec. 901. Authorization of medical facility projects.
Sec. 902. Designation of Merril Lundman Department of Veterans Affairs
Outpatient Clinic, Havre, Montana.
Sec. 903. Designation of William C. Tallent Department of Veterans
Affairs Outpatient Clinic, Knoxville, Tennessee.
Sec. 904. Designation of Max J. Beilke Department of Veterans Affairs
Outpatient Clinic, Alexandria, Minnesota.

[[Page 1132]]

TITLE X--OTHER MATTERS

Sec. 1001. Expansion of authority for Department of Veterans Affairs
police officers.
Sec. 1002. Uniform allowance for Department of Veterans Affairs police
officers.
Sec. 1003. Submission of reports to Congress by Secretary of Veterans
Affairs in electronic form.
Sec. 1004. Determination of budgetary effects for purposes of compliance
with Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010.

SEC. 2. REFERENCES TO TITLE 38, UNITED STATES CODE.

Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to
be made to a section or other provision of title 38, United States Code.

TITLE I--CAREGIVER SUPPORT

SEC. 101. ASSISTANCE AND SUPPORT SERVICES FOR CAREGIVERS.

(a) Assistance and Support Services.--
(1) In general.--Subchapter II of chapter 17 is amended by
adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 1720G. Assistance and support services for caregivers

``(a) Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers.--
(1)(A) The Secretary shall establish a program of comprehensive
assistance for family caregivers of eligible veterans.
``(B) <> The Secretary shall only provide
support under the program required by subparagraph (A) to a family
caregiver of an eligible veteran if the Secretary determines it is in
the best interest of the eligible veteran to do so.

``(2) For purposes of this subsection, an eligible veteran is any
individual who--
``(A) is a veteran or member of the Armed Forces undergoing
medical discharge from the Armed Forces;
``(B) has a serious injury (including traumatic brain
injury, psychological trauma, or other mental disorder) incurred
or aggravated in the line of duty in the active military, naval,
or air service on or after September 11, 2001; and
``(C) is in need of personal care services because of--
``(i) an inability to perform one or more activities
of daily living;
``(ii) a need for supervision or protection based on
symptoms or residuals of neurological or other
impairment or injury; or
``(iii) such other matters as the Secretary
considers appropriate.

``(3)(A) As part of the program required by paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall provide to family caregivers of eligible veterans the
following assistance:
``(i) To each family caregiver who is approved as a provider
of personal care services for an eligible veteran under
paragraph (6)--
``(I) such instruction, preparation, and training as
the Secretary considers appropriate for the family
caregiver to provide personal care services to the
eligible veteran;
``(II) ongoing technical support consisting of
information and assistance to address, in a timely
manner, the

[[Page 1133]]

routine, emergency, and specialized caregiving needs of
the family caregiver in providing personal care services
to the eligible veteran;
``(III) counseling; and
``(IV) lodging and subsistence under section 111(e)
of this title.
``(ii) To each family caregiver who is designated as the
primary provider of personal care services for an eligible
veteran under paragraph (7)--
``(I) the assistance described in clause (i);
``(II) such mental health services as the Secretary
determines appropriate;
``(III) respite care of not less than 30 days
annually, including 24-hour per day care of the veteran
commensurate with the care provided by the family
caregiver to permit extended respite;
``(IV) medical care under section 1781 of this
title; and
``(V) a monthly personal caregiver stipend.

``(B) Respite care provided under subparagraph (A)(ii)(III) shall be
medically and age-appropriate and include in-home care.
``(C)(i) <> The amount of the monthly
personal caregiver stipend provided under subparagraph (A)(ii)(V) shall
be determined in accordance with a schedule established by the Secretary
that specifies stipends based upon the amount and degree of personal
care services provided.

``(ii) The Secretary shall ensure, to the extent practicable, that
the schedule required by clause (i) specifies that the amount of the
monthly personal caregiver stipend provided to a primary provider of
personal care services for the provision of personal care services to an
eligible veteran is not less than the monthly amount a commercial home
health care entity would pay an individual in the geographic area of the
eligible veteran to provide equivalent personal care services to the
eligible veteran.
``(iii) If personal care services are not available from a
commercial home health entity in the geographic area of an eligible
veteran, the amount of the monthly personal caregiver stipend payable
under the schedule required by clause (i) with respect to the eligible
veteran shall be determined by taking into consideration the costs of
commercial providers of personal care services in providing personal
care services in geographic areas other than the geographic area of the
eligible veteran with similar costs of living.
``(4) <> An eligible veteran and a family member
of the eligible veteran seeking to participate in the program required
by paragraph (1) shall jointly submit to the Secretary an application
therefor in such form and in such manner as the Secretary considers
appropriate.

``(5) For each application submitted jointly by an eligible veteran
and family member, the Secretary shall evaluate--
``(A) the eligible veteran--
``(i) to identify the personal care services
required by the eligible veteran; and
``(ii) to determine whether such requirements could
be significantly or substantially satisfied through the
provision of personal care services from a family
member; and
``(B) the family member to determine the amount of
instruction, preparation, and training, if any, the family
member

[[Page 1134]]

requires to provide the personal care services required by the
eligible veteran--
``(i) as a provider of personal care services for
the eligible veteran; and
``(ii) as the primary provider of personal care
services for the eligible veteran.

``(6)(A) The Secretary shall provide each family member of an
eligible veteran who makes a joint application under paragraph (4) the
instruction, preparation, and training determined to be required by such
family member under paragraph (5)(B).
``(B) Upon the successful completion by a family member of an
eligible veteran of instruction, preparation, and training under
subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall approve the family member as a
provider of personal care services for the eligible veteran.
``(C) <> The Secretary shall, subject to
regulations the Secretary shall prescribe, provide for necessary travel,
lodging, and per diem expenses incurred by a family member of an
eligible veteran in undergoing instruction, preparation, and training
under subparagraph (A).

``(D) <> If the participation of a family member
of an eligible veteran in instruction, preparation, and training under
subparagraph (A) would interfere with the provision of personal care
services to the eligible veteran, the Secretary shall, subject to
regulations as the Secretary shall prescribe and in consultation with
the veteran, provide respite care to the eligible veteran during the
provision of such instruction, preparation, and training to the family
member so that the family member can participate in such instruction,
preparation, and training without interfering with the provision of such
services to the eligible veteran.

``(7)(A) <> For each eligible veteran with at
least one family member who is described by subparagraph (B), the
Secretary shall designate one family member of such eligible veteran as
the primary provider of personal care services for such eligible
veteran.

``(B) A primary provider of personal care services designated for an
eligible veteran under subparagraph (A) shall be selected from among
family members of the eligible veteran who--
``(i) are approved under paragraph (6) as a provider of
personal care services for the eligible veteran;
``(ii) <> elect to provide the
personal care services to the eligible veteran that the
Secretary determines the eligible veteran requires under
paragraph (5)(A)(i);
``(iii) has the consent of the eligible veteran to be the
primary provider of personal care services for the eligible
veteran; and
``(iv) are considered by the Secretary as competent to be
the primary provider of personal care services for the eligible
veteran.

``(C) <> An eligible veteran receiving personal
care services from a family member designated as the primary provider of
personal care services for the eligible veteran under subparagraph (A)
may, in accordance with procedures the Secretary shall establish for
such purposes, revoke consent with respect to such family member under
subparagraph (B)(iii).

``(D) If a family member designated as the primary provider of
personal care services for an eligible veteran under subparagraph (A)
subsequently fails to meet any requirement set forth in subparagraph
(B), the Secretary--

[[Page 1135]]

``(i) shall immediately revoke the family member's
designation under subparagraph (A); and
``(ii) may designate, in consultation with the eligible
veteran, a new primary provider of personal care services for
the eligible veteran under such subparagraph.

``(E) The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to
ensure that the revocation of a designation under subparagraph (A) with
respect to an eligible veteran does not interfere with the provision of
personal care services required by the eligible veteran.
``(8) If an eligible veteran lacks the capacity to make a decision
under this subsection, the Secretary may, in accordance with regulations
and policies of the Department regarding appointment of guardians or the
use of powers of attorney, appoint a surrogate for the eligible veteran
who may make decisions and take action under this subsection on behalf
of the eligible veteran.
``(9)(A) The Secretary shall monitor the well-being of each eligible
veteran receiving personal care services under the program required by
paragraph (1).
``(B) The Secretary shall document each finding the Secretary
considers pertinent to the appropriate delivery of personal care
services to an eligible veteran under the program.
``(C) <> The Secretary shall establish procedures
to ensure appropriate follow-up regarding findings described in
subparagraph (B). Such procedures may include the following:
``(i) Visiting an eligible veteran in the eligible veteran's
home to review directly the quality of personal care services
provided to the eligible veteran.
``(ii) Taking such corrective action with respect to the
findings of any review of the quality of personal care services
provided an eligible veteran as the Secretary considers
appropriate, which may include--
``(I) providing additional training to a family
caregiver; and
``(II) suspending or revoking the approval of a
family caregiver under paragraph (6) or the designation
of a family caregiver under paragraph (7).

``(10) The Secretary shall carry out outreach to inform eligible
veterans and family members of eligible veterans of the program required
by paragraph (1) and the benefits of participating in the program.
``(b) Program of General Caregiver Support Services.--(1) The
Secretary shall establish a program of support services for caregivers
of covered veterans who are enrolled in the health care system
established under section 1705(a) of this title (including caregivers
who do not reside with such veterans).
``(2) For purposes of this subsection, a covered veteran is any
individual who needs personal care services because of--
``(A) an inability to perform one or more activities of
daily living;
``(B) a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms
or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or
``(C) such other matters as the Secretary shall specify.

``(3)(A) The support services furnished to caregivers of covered
veterans under the program required by paragraph (1) shall include the
following:

[[Page 1136]]

``(i) Services regarding the administering of personal care
services, which, subject to subparagraph (B), shall include--
``(I) educational sessions made available both in
person and on an Internet website;
``(II) use of telehealth and other available
technologies; and
``(III) teaching techniques, strategies, and skills
for caring for a disabled veteran;
``(ii) Counseling and other services under section 1782 of
this title.
``(iii) Respite care under section 1720B of this title that
is medically and age appropriate for the veteran (including 24-
hour per day in-home care).
``(iv) Information concerning the supportive services
available to caregivers under this subsection and other public,
private, and nonprofit agencies that offer support to
caregivers.

``(B) <> If the Secretary
certifies to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the
House of Representatives that funding available for a fiscal year is
insufficient to fund the provision of services specified in one or more
subclauses of subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary shall not be required
under subparagraph (A) to provide the services so specified in the
certification during the period beginning on the date that is 180 days
after the date the certification is received by the Committees and
ending on the last day of the fiscal year.

``(4) In providing information under paragraph (3)(A)(iv), the
Secretary shall collaborate with the Assistant Secretary for Aging of
the Department of Health and Human Services in order to provide
caregivers access to aging and disability resource centers under the
Administration on Aging of the Department of Health and Human Services.
``(5) In carrying out the program required by paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall conduct outreach to inform covered veterans and
caregivers of covered veterans about the program. The outreach shall
include an emphasis on covered veterans and caregivers of covered
veterans living in rural areas.
``(c) Construction.--(1) A decision by the Secretary under this
section affecting the furnishing of assistance or support shall be
considered a medical determination.
``(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to create--
``(A) an employment relationship between the Secretary and
an individual in receipt of assistance or support under this
section; or
``(B) any entitlement to any assistance or support provided
under this section.

``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
``(1) The term `caregiver', with respect to an eligible
veteran under subsection (a) or a covered veteran under
subsection (b), means an individual who provides personal care
services to the veteran.
``(2) The term `family caregiver', with respect to an
eligible veteran under subsection (a), means a family member who
is a caregiver of the veteran.
``(3) The term `family member', with respect to an eligible
veteran under subsection (a), means an individual who--
``(A) is a member of the family of the veteran,
including--

[[Page 1137]]

``(i) a parent;
``(ii) a spouse;
``(iii) a child;
``(iv) a step-family member; and
``(v) an extended family member; or
``(B) lives with the veteran but is not a member of
the family of the veteran.
``(4) The term `personal care services', with respect to an
eligible veteran under subsection (a) or a covered veteran under
subsection (b), means services that provide the veteran the
following:
``(A) Assistance with one or more independent
activities of daily living.
``(B) Any other non-institutional extended care (as
such term is used in section 1701(6)(E) of this title).

``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be
appropriated to carry out the programs required by subsections (a) and
(b)--
``(1) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; and
``(2) $1,542,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2011
through 2015.''.
(2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the
beginning of chapter 17 is amended by inserting after the item
related to section 1720F the following new item:

``1720G. Assistance and support services for caregivers.''.

(3) <> Effective date.--
(A) In general.--The amendments made by this
subsection shall take effect on the date that is 270
days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
(B) Implementation.--The Secretary of Veterans
Affairs shall commence the programs required by
subsections (a) and (b) of section 1720G of title 38,
United States Code, as added by paragraph (1) of this
subsection, on the date on which the amendments made by
this subsection take effect.

(b) Implementation Plan and Report.--
(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs
shall--
(A) develop a plan for the implementation of the
program of comprehensive assistance for family
caregivers required by section 1720G(a)(1) of title 38,
United States Code, as added by subsection (a)(1) of
this section; and
(B) submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the
House of Representatives a report on such plan.
(2) Consultation.--In developing the plan required by
paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall consult with the
following:
(A) Individuals described in section 1720G(a)(2) of
title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection
(a)(1) of this section.
(B) Family members of such individuals who provide
personal care services to such individuals.
(C) The Secretary of Defense with respect to matters
concerning personal care services for members of the
Armed Forces undergoing medical discharge from the Armed

[[Page 1138]]

Forces who are eligible to benefit from personal care
services furnished under the program of comprehensive
assistance required by section 1720G(a)(1) of such
title, as so added.
(D) Veterans service organizations, as recognized by
the Secretary for the representation of veterans under
section 5902 of such title.
(E) National organizations that specialize in the
provision of assistance to individuals with the types of
disabilities that family caregivers will encounter while
providing personal care services under the program of
comprehensive assistance required by section 1720G(a)(1)
of such title, as so added.
(F) National organizations that specialize in
provision of assistance to family members of veterans
who provide personal care services to such veterans.
(G) Such other organizations with an interest in the
provision of care to veterans and assistance to family
caregivers as the Secretary considers appropriate.
(3) Report contents.--The report required by paragraph
(1)(B) shall contain the following:
(A) The plan required by paragraph (1)(A).
(B) A description of the individuals, caregivers,
and organizations consulted by the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs under paragraph (2).
(C) A description of such consultations.
(D) The recommendations of such individuals,
caregivers, and organizations, if any, that were not
adopted and incorporated into the plan required by
paragraph (1)(A), and the reasons the Secretary did not
adopt such recommendations.

(c) <> Annual Evaluation Report.--
(1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date
described in subsection (a)(3)(A) and annually thereafter, the
Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House
of Representatives a comprehensive report on the implementation
of section 1720G of title 38, United States Code, as added by
subsection (a)(1).
(2) Contents.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall
include the following:
(A) With respect to the program of comprehensive
assistance for family caregivers required by subsection
(a)(1) of such section 1720G and the program of general
caregiver support services required by subsection (b)(1)
of such section--
(i) the number of caregivers that received
assistance under such programs;
(ii) the cost to the Department of providing
assistance under such programs;
(iii) a description of the outcomes achieved
by, and any measurable benefits of, carrying out
such programs;
(iv) an assessment of the effectiveness and
the efficiency of the implementation of such
programs; and
(v) such recommendations, including
recommendations for legislative or administrative
action, as the

[[Page 1139]]

Secretary considers appropriate in light of
carrying out such programs.
(B) With respect to the program of comprehensive
assistance for family caregivers required by such
subsection (a)(1)--
(i) a description of the outreach activities
carried out by the Secretary under such program;
and
(ii) an assessment of the manner in which
resources are expended by the Secretary under such
program, particularly with respect to the
provision of monthly personal caregiver stipends
under paragraph (3)(A)(ii)(v) of such subsection
(a).
(C) With respect to the provision of general
caregiver support services required by such subsection
(b)(1)--
(i) a summary of the support services made
available under the program;
(ii) the number of caregivers who received
support services under the program;
(iii) the cost to the Department of providing
each support service provided under the program;
and
(iv) such other information as the Secretary
considers appropriate.

(d) Report on Expansion of Family Caregiver Assistance.--
(1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date
described in subsection (a)(3)(A), the Secretary shall submit to
the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the
Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives a
report on the feasibility and advisability of expanding the
provision of assistance under section 1720G(a) of title 38,
United States Code, as added by subsection (a)(1), to family
caregivers of veterans who have a serious injury incurred or
aggravated in the line of duty in the active military, naval, or
air service before September 11, 2001.
(2) Recommendations.--The report required by paragraph (1)
shall include such recommendations as the Secretary considers
appropriate with respect to the expansion described in such
paragraph.
SEC. 102. MEDICAL CARE FOR FAMILY CAREGIVERS.

Section 1781(a) is amended--
(1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end;
(2) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``and'' at the end; and
(3) by inserting after paragraph (3), the following new
paragraph:
``(4) an individual designated as a primary provider of
personal care services under section 1720G(a)(7)(A) of this
title who is not entitled to care or services under a health-
plan contract (as defined in section 1725(f) of this title);''.
SEC. 103. COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR CAREGIVERS.

(a) In General.--Section 1782(c) is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``; or'' and inserting a
semicolon;
(2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
(3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new
paragraph (2):

[[Page 1140]]

``(2) a family caregiver of an eligible veteran or a
caregiver of a covered veteran (as those terms are defined in
section 1720G of this title); or''.

(b) Conforming Amendment.--The section heading of section 1782 is
amended by adding at the end, the following: ``and caregivers''.
(c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 17 is amended by striking the item relating to section 1782 and
inserting the following new item:

``1782. Counseling, training, and mental health services for immediate
family members and caregivers.''.

SEC. 104. LODGING AND SUBSISTENCE FOR ATTENDANTS.

Section 111(e) is amended--
(1) by striking ``When'' and inserting the following: ``(1)
Except as provided in paragraph (2), when''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:

``(2)(A) Without regard to whether an eligible veteran entitled to
mileage under this section for travel to a Department facility for the
purpose of medical examination, treatment, or care requires an attendant
in order to perform such travel, an attendant of such veteran described
in subparagraph (B) may be allowed expenses of travel (including lodging
and subsistence) upon the same basis as such veteran during--
``(i) the period of time in which such veteran is traveling
to and from a Department facility for the purpose of medical
examination, treatment, or care; and
``(ii) the duration of the medical examination, treatment,
or care episode for such veteran.

``(B) An attendant of a veteran described in this subparagraph is a
provider of personal care services for such veteran who is approved
under paragraph (6) of section 1720G(a) of this title or designated
under paragraph (7) of such section 1720G(a).
``(C) The Secretary may prescribe regulations to carry out this
paragraph. Such regulations may include provisions--
``(i) to limit the number of attendants that may receive
expenses of travel under this paragraph for a single medical
examination, treatment, or care episode of an eligible veteran;
and
``(ii) to require such attendants to use certain travel
services.

``(D) In this subsection, the term `eligible veteran' has the
meaning given that term in section 1720G(a)(2) of this title.''.

TITLE II--WOMEN VETERANS HEALTH CARE MATTERS

SEC. 201. STUDY OF BARRIERS FOR WOMEN VETERANS TO HEALTH CARE FROM
THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

(a) Study Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct
a comprehensive study of the barriers to the provision of comprehensive
health care by the Department of Veterans Affairs encountered by women
who are veterans. In conducting the study, the Secretary shall--

[[Page 1141]]

(1) survey women veterans who seek or receive hospital care
or medical services provided by the Department of Veterans
Affairs as well as women veterans who do not seek or receive
such care or services;
(2) administer the survey to a representative sample of
women veterans from each Veterans Integrated Service Network;
and
(3) ensure that the sample of women veterans surveyed is of
sufficient size for the study results to be statistically
significant and is a larger sample than that of the study
referred to in subsection (b).

(b) Use of Previous Study.--In conducting the study required by
subsection (a), the Secretary shall build on the work of the study of
the Department of Veterans Affairs titled ``National Survey of Women
Veterans in Fiscal Year 2007-2008''.
(c) Elements of Study.--In conducting the study required by
subsection (a), the Secretary shall conduct research on the effects of
the following on the women veterans surveyed in the study:
(1) The perceived stigma associated with seeking mental
health care services.
(2) The effect of driving distance or availability of other
forms of transportation to the nearest medical facility on
access to care.
(3) The availability of child care.
(4) The acceptability of integrated primary care, women's
health clinics, or both.
(5) The comprehension of eligibility requirements for, and
the scope of services available under, hospital care and medical
services.
(6) The perception of personal safety and comfort in
inpatient, outpatient, and behavioral health facilities.
(7) The gender sensitivity of health care providers and
staff to issues that particularly affect women.
(8) The effectiveness of outreach for health care services
available to women veterans.
(9) The location and operating hours of health care
facilities that provide services to women veterans.
(10) Such other significant barriers as the Secretary
considers appropriate.

(d) Discharge by Contract.--The Secretary shall enter into a
contract with a qualified independent entity or organization to carry
out the study and research required under this section.
(e) Mandatory Review of Data by Certain Department Divisions.--
(1) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that the head of
each division of the Department of Veterans Affairs specified in
paragraph (2) reviews the results of the study conducted under
this section. <> The head of each such
division shall submit findings with respect to the study to the
Under Secretary for Health and to other pertinent program
offices within the Department of Veterans Affairs with
responsibilities relating to health care services for women
veterans.
(2) Specified divisions.--The divisions of the Department of
Veterans Affairs specified in this paragraph are the following:
(A) The Center for Women Veterans established under
section 318 of title 38, United States Code.

[[Page 1142]]

(B) The Advisory Committee on Women Veterans
established under section 542 of such title.

(f) Reports.--
(1) Report on implementation.--Not later than 6 months after
the date on which the Department of Veterans Affairs publishes a
final report on the study titled ``National Survey of Women
Veterans in Fiscal Year 2007-2008'', the Secretary shall submit
to Congress a report on the status of the implementation of this
section.
(2) Report on study.--Not later than 30 months after the
date on which the Department publishes such final report, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the study
required under this section. The report shall include
recommendations for such administrative and legislative action
as the Secretary considers appropriate. The report shall also
include the findings of the head of each division of the
Department specified under subsection (e)(2) and of the Under
Secretary for Health.

(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs $4,000,000 to carry
out this section.
SEC. 202. TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION FOR MENTAL HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS ON CARE FOR VETERANS SUFFERING
FROM SEXUAL TRAUMA AND POST-TRAUMATIC
STRESS DISORDER.

Section 1720D is amended--
(1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (f); and
(2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new
subsections:

``(d)(1) The Secretary shall carry out a program to provide graduate
medical education, training, certification, and continuing medical
education for mental health professionals who provide counseling, care,
and services under subsection (a).
``(2) In carrying out the program required by paragraph (1), the
Secretary shall ensure that--
``(A) all mental health professionals described in such
paragraph have been trained in a consistent manner; and
``(B) training described in such paragraph includes
principles of evidence-based treatment and care for sexual
trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder.

``(e) <> Each year, the Secretary shall
submit to Congress an annual report on the counseling, care, and
services provided to veterans pursuant to this section. Each report
shall include data for the year covered by the report with respect to
each of the following:
``(1) The number of mental health professionals, graduate
medical education trainees, and primary care providers who have
been certified under the program required by subsection (d) and
the amount and nature of continuing medical education provided
under such program to such professionals, trainees, and
providers who are so certified.
``(2) The number of women veterans who received counseling
and care and services under subsection (a) from professionals
and providers who received training under subsection (d).

[[Page 1143]]

``(3) The number of graduate medical education, training,
certification, and continuing medical education courses provided
by reason of subsection (d).
``(4) The number of trained full-time equivalent employees
required in each facility of the Department to meet the needs of
veterans requiring treatment and care for sexual trauma and
post-traumatic stress disorder.
``(5) Such recommendations for improvements in the treatment
of women veterans with sexual trauma and post-traumatic stress
disorder as the Secretary considers appropriate.
``(6) Such other information as the Secretary considers
appropriate.''.
SEC. 203. <> PILOT PROGRAM ON COUNSELING
IN RETREAT SETTINGS FOR WOMEN VETERANS
NEWLY SEPARATED FROM SERVICE IN THE ARMED
FORCES.

(a) Pilot Program Required.--
(1) In general. <> --Commencing not later
than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out, through the
Readjustment Counseling Service of the Veterans Health
Administration, a pilot program to evaluate the feasibility and
advisability of providing reintegration and readjustment
services described in subsection (b) in group retreat settings
to women veterans who are recently separated from service in the
Armed Forces after a prolonged deployment.
(2) Participation at election of veteran.--The participation
of a veteran in the pilot program under this section shall be at
the election of the veteran.

(b) Covered Services.--The services provided to a woman veteran
under the pilot program shall include the following:
(1) Information on reintegration into the veteran's family,
employment, and community.
(2) Financial counseling.
(3) Occupational counseling.
(4) Information and counseling on stress reduction.
(5) Information and counseling on conflict resolution.
(6) Such other information and counseling as the Secretary
considers appropriate to assist a woman veteran under the pilot
program in reintegration into the veteran's family, employment,
and community.

(c) Locations.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program at
not fewer than three locations selected by the Secretary for purposes of
the pilot program.
(d) Duration.--The pilot program shall be carried out during the 2-
year period beginning on the date of the commencement of the pilot
program.
(e) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the completion of the
pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
pilot program. The report shall contain the findings and conclusions of
the Secretary as a result of the pilot program, and shall include such
recommendations for the continuation or expansion of the pilot program
as the Secretary considers appropriate.
(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for each

[[Page 1144]]

of fiscal years 2010 and 2011, $2,000,000 to carry out the pilot
program.
SEC. 204. SERVICE ON CERTAIN ADVISORY COMMITTEES OF WOMEN RECENTLY
SEPARATED FROM SERVICE IN THE ARMED
FORCES.

(a) Advisory Committee on Women Veterans.--Section 542(a)(2)(A) is
amended--
(1) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
(2) in clause (iii), by striking the period at the end and
inserting ``; and''; and
(3) by inserting after clause (iii) the following new
clause:
``(iv) women veterans who are recently separated from
service in the Armed Forces.''.

(b) Advisory Committee on Minority Veterans.--Section 544(a)(2)(A)
is amended--
(1) in clause (iii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
(2) in clause (iv), by striking the period at the end and
inserting ``; and''; and
(3) by inserting after clause (iv) the following new clause:
``(v) women veterans who are minority group members and are
recently separated from service in the Armed Forces.''.

(c) <> Applicability.--The amendments made
by this section shall apply to appointments made on or after the date of
the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 205. <> PILOT PROGRAM ON ASSISTANCE
FOR CHILD CARE FOR CERTAIN VETERANS
RECEIVING HEALTH CARE.

(a) Pilot Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
carry out a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of
providing, subject to subsection (b), assistance to qualified veterans
described in subsection (c) to obtain child care so that such veterans
can receive health care services described in subsection (c).
(b) Limitation on Period of Payments.--Assistance may only be
provided to a qualified veteran under the pilot program for receipt of
child care during the period that the qualified veteran--
(1) receives the types of health care services described in
subsection (c) at a facility of the Department; and
(2) requires travel to and return from such facility for the
receipt of such health care services.

(c) Qualified Veterans.--For purposes of this section, a qualified
veteran is a veteran who is--
(1) the primary caretaker of a child or children; and
(2)(A) receiving from the Department--
(i) regular mental health care services;
(ii) intensive mental health care services; or
(iii) such other intensive health care services that
the Secretary determines that provision of assistance to
the veteran to obtain child care would improve access to
such health care services by the veteran; or
(B) in need of regular or intensive mental health care
services from the Department, and but for lack of child care
services, would receive such health care services from the
Department.

(d) Locations.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program in
no fewer than three Veterans Integrated Service Networks selected by the
Secretary for purposes of the pilot program.

[[Page 1145]]

(e) Duration.--The pilot program shall be carried out during the 2-
year period beginning on the date of the commencement of the pilot
program.
(f) Forms of Child Care Assistance.--
(1) In general.--Child care assistance under this section
may include the following:
(A) Stipends for the payment of child care offered
by licensed child care centers (either directly or
through a voucher program) which shall be, to the extent
practicable, modeled after the Department of Veterans
Affairs Child Care Subsidy Program established pursuant
to section 630 of the Treasury and General Government
Appropriations Act, 2002 (Public Law 107-67; 115 Stat.
552).
(B) Direct provision of child care at an on-site
facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
(C) Payments to private child care agencies.
(D) Collaboration with facilities or programs of
other Federal departments or agencies.
(E) Such other forms of assistance as the Secretary
considers appropriate.
(2) Amounts of stipends.--In the case that child care
assistance under this section is provided as a stipend under
paragraph (1)(A), such stipend shall cover the full cost of such
child care.

(g) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the completion of the
pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the
pilot program. The report shall include the findings and conclusions of
the Secretary as a result of the pilot program, and shall include such
recommendations for the continuation or expansion of the pilot program
as the Secretary considers appropriate.
(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be
appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out the pilot
program $1,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 and 2011.
SEC. 206. CARE FOR NEWBORN CHILDREN OF WOMEN VETERANS RECEIVING
MATERNITY CARE.

(a) In General.--Subchapter VIII of chapter 17 is amended by adding
at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 1786. Care for newborn children of women veterans receiving
maternity care

``(a) In General.--The Secretary may furnish health care services
described in subsection (b) to a newborn child of a woman veteran who is
receiving maternity care furnished by the Department for not more than
seven days after the birth of the child if the veteran delivered the
child in--
``(1) a facility of the Department; or
``(2) another facility pursuant to a Department contract for
services relating to such delivery.

``(b) Covered Health Care Services.--Health care services described
in this subsection are all post-delivery care services, including
routine care services, that a newborn child requires.''.

[[Page 1146]]

(b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 17 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
1785 the following new item:

``1786. Care for newborn children of women veterans receiving maternity
care.''.

TITLE III--RURAL HEALTH IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 301. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE EDUCATION DEBT REDUCTION PROGRAM.

(a) Inclusion of Employee Retention as Purpose of Program.--Section
7681(a)(2) is amended by inserting ``and retention'' after
``recruitment'' the first time it appears.
(b) Expansion of Eligibility.--Section 7682 is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``a recently
appointed'' and inserting ``an''; and
(2) by striking subsection (c).

(c) Increase in Maximum Annual Amount of Payments.--Paragraph (1) of
subsection (d) of section 7683 is amended--
(1) by striking ``$44,000'' and inserting ``$60,000''; and
(2) by striking ``$10,000'' and inserting ``$12,000''.

(d) Exception to Limitation on Amount for Certain Participants.--
Such subsection is further amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
``(3)(A) <> The Secretary may waive the
limitations under paragraphs (1) and (2) in the case of a participant
described in subparagraph (B). In the case of such a waiver, the total
amount of education debt repayments payable to that participant is the
total amount of the principal and the interest on the participant's
loans referred to in subsection (a).

``(B) <> A participant described in this
subparagraph is a participant in the Program who the Secretary
determines serves in a position for which there is a shortage of
qualified employees by reason of either the location or the requirements
of the position.''.
SEC. 302. VISUAL IMPAIRMENT AND ORIENTATION AND MOBILITY
PROFESSIONALS EDUCATION ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM.

(a) Establishment of Program.--Part V is amended by inserting after
chapter 74 the following new chapter:

``CHAPTER 75--VISUAL IMPAIRMENT AND ORIENTATION AND MOBILITY
PROFESSIONALS EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

``Sec.
``7501. Establishment of scholarship program; purpose.
``7502. Application and acceptance.
``7503. Amount of assistance; duration.
``7504. Agreement.
``7505. Repayment for failure to satisfy requirements of agreement.

``Sec. 7501. Establishment of scholarship program; purpose

``(a) Establishment.--Subject to the availability of appropriations,
the Secretary shall establish and carry out a scholarship program to
provide financial assistance in accordance with this chapter to
individuals who--

[[Page 1147]]

``(1) are accepted for enrollment or currently enrolled in a
program of study leading to a degree or certificate in visual
impairment or orientation and mobility, or a dual degree or
certification in both such areas, at an accredited (as
determined by the Secretary) educational institution that is in
a State; and
``(2) <> enter into an agreement with the
Secretary as described in section 7504 of this title.

``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of the scholarship program is to
increase the supply of qualified blind rehabilitation specialists for
the Department and the Nation.
``(c) Outreach.--The Secretary shall publicize the scholarship
program to educational institutions throughout the United States, with
an emphasis on disseminating information to such institutions with high
numbers of Hispanic students and to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities.
``Sec. 7502. Application and acceptance

``(a) Application.--(1) To apply and participate in the scholarship
program under this chapter, an individual shall submit to the Secretary
an application for such participation together with an agreement
described in section 7504 of this title under which the participant
agrees to serve a period of obligated service in the Department as
provided in the agreement in return for payment of educational
assistance as provided in the agreement.
``(2) In distributing application forms and agreement forms to
individuals desiring to participate in the scholarship program, the
Secretary shall include with such forms the following:
``(A) A fair summary of the rights and liabilities of an
individual whose application is approved (and whose agreement is
accepted) by the Secretary.
``(B) A full description of the terms and conditions that
apply to participation in the scholarship program and service in
the Department.

``(b) <> Approval.--(1) Upon the Secretary's
approval of an individual's participation in the scholarship program,
the Secretary shall, in writing, promptly notify the individual of that
acceptance.

``(2) An individual becomes a participant in the scholarship program
upon such approval by the Secretary.
``Sec. 7503. Amount of assistance; duration

``(a) Amount of Assistance. <> --The amount of
the financial assistance provided an individual under the scholarship
program under this chapter shall be the amount determined by the
Secretary as being necessary to pay the tuition and fees of the
individual. In the case of an individual enrolled in a program of study
leading to a dual degree or certification in both the areas of study
described in section 7501(a)(1) of this title, the tuition and fees
shall not exceed the amounts necessary for the minimum number of credit
hours to achieve such dual degree or certification.

``(b) Relationship to Other Assistance.--Financial assistance may be
provided to an individual under the scholarship program to supplement
other educational assistance to the extent that the total amount of
educational assistance received by the individual during an academic
year does not exceed the total tuition and fees for such academic year.

[[Page 1148]]

``(c) Maximum Amount of Assistance.--(1) The total amount of
assistance provided under the scholarship program for an academic year
to an individual who is a full-time student may not exceed $15,000.
``(2) In the case of an individual who is a part-time student, the
total amount of assistance provided under the scholarship program shall
bear the same ratio to the amount that would be paid under paragraph (1)
if the participant were a full-time student in the program of study
being pursued by the individual as the coursework carried by the
individual to full-time coursework in that program of study.
``(3) The total amount of assistance provided to an individual under
the scholarship program may not exceed $45,000.
``(d) Maximum Duration of Assistance.--Financial assistance may not
be provided to an individual under the scholarship program for more than
six academic years.
``Sec. 7504. Agreement

``An agreement between the Secretary and a participant in the
scholarship program under this chapter shall be in writing, shall be
signed by the participant, and shall include--
``(1) the Secretary's agreement to provide the participant
with financial assistance as authorized under this chapter;
``(2) the participant's agreement--
``(A) to accept such financial assistance;
``(B) to maintain enrollment and attendance in the
program of study described in section 7501(a)(1) of this
title;
``(C) while enrolled in such program, to maintain an
acceptable level of academic standing (as determined by
the educational institution offering such program under
regulations prescribed by the Secretary); and
``(D) after completion of the program, to serve as a
full-time employee in the Department for a period of
three years, to be served within the first six years
after the participant has completed such program and
received a degree or certificate described in section
7501(a)(1) of this title; and
``(3) any other terms and conditions that the Secretary
considers appropriate for carrying out this chapter.
``Sec. 7505. Repayment for failure to satisfy requirements of
agreement

``(a) In General.--An individual who receives educational assistance
under the scholarship program under this chapter shall repay to the
Secretary an amount equal to the unearned portion of such assistance if
the individual fails to satisfy the requirements of the agreement
entered into under section 7504 of this title, except in circumstances
authorized by the Secretary.
``(b) Amount of Repayment. <> --The
Secretary shall establish, by regulations, procedures for determining
the amount of the repayment required under this section and the
circumstances under which an exception to the required repayment may be
granted.

``(c) Waiver or Suspension of Compliance. <> --
The Secretary shall prescribe regulations providing for the waiver or
suspension of any obligation of an individual for service or payment
under this chapter (or an agreement under this chapter) whenever--

[[Page 1149]]

``(1) noncompliance by the individual is due to
circumstances beyond the control of the individual; or
``(2) <> the Secretary determines that
the waiver or suspension of compliance is in the best interest
of the United States.

``(d) Obligation as Debt to United States.--An obligation to repay
the Secretary under this section is, for all purposes, a debt owed the
United States. A discharge in bankruptcy under title 11 does not
discharge a person from such debt if the discharge order is entered less
than five years after the date of the termination of the agreement or
contract on which the debt is based.''.
(b) Clerical Amendments.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of
title 38, and of part V, are each amended by inserting after the item
relating to chapter 74 the following new item:

``75. Visual Impairment and Orientation and Mobility Professionals
Educational Assistance Program...................................7501''.

(c) Implementation. <> --The
Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall implement chapter 75 of title 38,
United States Code, as added by subsection (a), not later than 6 months
after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 303. <> DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS ON
ALTERNATIVES FOR EXPANDING CARE FOR
VETERANS IN RURAL AREAS.

(a) In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may, through the
Director of the Office of Rural Health, carry out demonstration projects
to examine the feasibility and advisability of alternatives for
expanding care for veterans in rural areas, which may include the
following:
(1) Establishing a partnership between the Department of
Veterans Affairs and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services of the Department of Health and Human Services to
coordinate care for veterans in rural areas at critical access
hospitals (as designated or certified under section 1820 of the
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-4)).
(2) Establishing a partnership between the Department of
Veterans Affairs and the Department of Health and Human Services
to coordinate care for veterans in rural areas at community
health centers.
(3) Expanding coordination between the Department of
Veterans Affairs and the Indian Health Service to expand care
for Indian veterans.

(b) Geographic Distribution.--The Secretary shall ensure that the
demonstration projects carried out under subsection (a) are located at
facilities that are geographically distributed throughout the United
States.
(c) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report on the results of the
demonstration projects carried out under subsection (a) to--
(1) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the Committee on
Appropriations of the Senate; and
(2) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the Committee on
Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be
appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2010
and each fiscal year thereafter.

[[Page 1150]]

SEC. 304. <> PROGRAM ON READJUSTMENT AND
MENTAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR VETERANS
WHO SERVED IN OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM
AND OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM.

(a) Program Required. <> --Not later than 180 days
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs shall establish a program to provide--
(1) to veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation
Iraqi Freedom, particularly veterans who served in such
operations while in the National Guard and the Reserves--
(A) peer outreach services;
(B) peer support services;
(C) readjustment counseling and services described
in section 1712A of title 38, United States Code; and
(D) mental health services; and
(2) <> to members of the immediate
family of veterans described in paragraph (1), during the 3-year
period beginning on the date of the return of such veterans from
deployment in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi
Freedom, education, support, counseling, and mental health
services to assist in--
(A) the readjustment of such veterans to civilian
life;
(B) in the case such veterans have an injury or
illness incurred during such deployment, the recovery of
such veterans from such injury or illness; and
(C) the readjustment of the family following the
return of such veterans.

(b) Contracts With Community Mental Health Centers and Other
Qualified Entities. <> --In carrying out the
program required by subsection (a), the Secretary may contract with
community mental health centers and other qualified entities to provide
the services required by such subsection only in areas the Secretary
determines are not adequately served by other health care facilities or
vet centers of the Department of Veterans Affairs. Such contracts shall
require each contracting community health center or entity--
(1) to the extent practicable, to use telehealth services
for the delivery of services required by subsection (a);
(2) to the extent practicable, to employ veterans trained
under subsection (c) in the provision of services covered by
that subsection;
(3) to participate in the training program conducted in
accordance with subsection (d);
(4) to comply with applicable protocols of the Department
before incurring any liability on behalf of the Department for
the provision of services required by subsection (a);
(5) for each veteran for whom a community mental health
center or other qualified entity provides mental health services
under such contract, to provide the Department with such
clinical summary information as the Secretary shall require;
(6) <> to submit annual reports to
the Secretary containing, with respect to the program required
by subsection (a) and for the last full calendar year ending
before the submittal of such report--
(A) the number of the veterans served, veterans
diagnosed, and courses of treatment provided to veterans
as part of the program required by subsection (a); and
(B) demographic information for such services,
diagnoses, and courses of treatment; and

[[Page 1151]]

(7) to meet such other requirements as the Secretary shall
require.

(c) Training of Veterans for Provision of Peer-outreach and Peer-
support Services. <> --In carrying out the program
required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall contract with a national
not-for-profit mental health organization to carry out a national
program of training for veterans described in subsection (a) to provide
the services described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of
such subsection.

(d) Training of Clinicians for Provision of Services.--The Secretary
shall conduct a training program for clinicians of community mental
health centers or entities that have contracts with the Secretary under
subsection (b) to ensure that such clinicians can provide the services
required by subsection (a) in a manner that--
(1) recognizes factors that are unique to the experience of
veterans who served on active duty in Operation Enduring Freedom
or Operation Iraqi Freedom (including their combat and military
training experiences); and
(2) uses best practices and technologies.

(e) Vet Center Defined.--In this section, the term ``vet center''
means a center for readjustment counseling and related mental health
services for veterans under section 1712A of title 38, United States
Code.
SEC. 305. TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT FOR VETERANS RECEIVING TREATMENT AT
FACILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS.

(a) Enhancement of Allowance Based Upon Mileage Traveled.--Section
111 is amended--
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ``traveled,'' and
inserting ``(at a rate of 41.5 cents per mile),''; and
(2) by amending subsection (g) to read as follows:

``(g)(1) <> Beginning one year after the date
of the enactment of the Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services
Act of 2010, the Secretary may adjust the mileage rate described in
subsection (a) to be equal to the mileage reimbursement rate for the use
of privately owned vehicles by Government employees on official business
(when a Government vehicle is available), as prescribed by the
Administrator of General Services under section 5707(b) of title 5.

``(2) <> If an adjustment in the mileage
rate under paragraph (1) results in a lower mileage rate than the
mileage rate otherwise specified in subsection (a), the Secretary shall,
not later than 60 days before the date of the implementation of the
mileage rate as so adjusted, submit to Congress a written report setting
forth the adjustment in the mileage rate under this subsection, together
with a justification for the decision to make the adjustment in the
mileage rate under this subsection.''.

(b) Coverage of Cost of Transportation by Air.--Subsection (a) of
section 111, as amended by subsection (a)(1), is further amended by
inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``Actual
necessary expense of travel includes the reasonable costs of airfare if
travel by air is the only practical way to reach a Department
facility.''.
(c) Elimination of Limitation Based on Maximum Annual Rate of
Pension.--Subsection (b)(1)(D)(i) of such section is

[[Page 1152]]

amended by inserting ``who is not traveling by air and'' before ``whose
annual''.
(d) Determination of Practicality.--Subsection (b) of such section
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(4) In determining for purposes of subsection (a) whether travel
by air is the only practical way for a veteran to reach a Department
facility, the Secretary shall consider the medical condition of the
veteran and any other impediments to the use of ground transportation by
the veteran.''.
(e) <> No Expansion of Eligibility for
Beneficiary Travel.--The amendments made by subsections (b) and (d) of
this section may not be construed as expanding or otherwise modifying
eligibility for payments or allowances for beneficiary travel under
section 111 of title 38, United States Code, as in effect on the day
before the date of the enactment of this Act.

(f) <> Clarification of Relation to Public
Transportation in Veterans Health Administration
Handbook. <> --Not later than 30 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
revise the Veterans Health Administration Handbook to clarify that an
allowance for travel based on mileage paid under section 111(a) of title
38, United States Code, may exceed the cost of such travel by public
transportation regardless of medical necessity.
SEC. 306. <> PILOT PROGRAM ON INCENTIVES
FOR PHYSICIANS WHO ASSUME INPATIENT
RESPONSIBILITIES AT COMMUNITY HOSPITALS IN
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREAS.

(a) Pilot Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
carry out a pilot program to assess the feasability and advisability of
each of the following:
(1) The provision of financial incentives to eligible
physicians who obtain and maintain inpatient privileges at
community hospitals in health professional shortage areas in
order to facilitate the provision by such physicians of primary
care and mental health services to veterans at such hospitals.
(2) The collection of payments from third-party providers
for care provided by eligible physicians to nonveterans while
discharging inpatient responsibilities at community hospitals in
the course of exercising the privileges described in paragraph
(1).

(b) Eligible Physicians. <> --For purposes of
this section, an eligible physician is a primary care or mental health
physician employed by the Department of Veterans Affairs on a full-time
basis.

(c) Duration of Program.--The pilot program shall be carried out
during the 3-year period beginning on the date of the commencement of
the pilot program.
(d) Locations.--
(1) In general.--The pilot program shall be carried out at
not less than five community hospitals in each of not less than
two Veterans Integrated Services Networks. The hospitals shall
be selected by the Secretary using the results of the survey
required under subsection (e).
(2) Qualifying community hospitals.--A community hospital
may be selected by the Secretary as a location for the pilot
program if--

[[Page 1153]]

(A) the hospital is located in a health professional
shortage area; and
(B) the number of eligible physicians willing to
assume inpatient responsibilities at the hospital (as
determined using the result of the survey) is sufficient
for purposes of the pilot program.

(e) Survey of Physician Interest in Participation.--
(1) In general. <> --Not later than 120
days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
shall conduct a survey of eligible physicians to determine the
extent of the interest of such physicians in participating in
the pilot program.
(2) Elements.--The survey shall disclose the type, amount,
and nature of the financial incentives to be provided under
subsection (h) to physicians participating in the pilot program.

(f) Physician Participation.--
(1) In general.--The Secretary shall select physicians for
participation in the pilot program from among eligible
physicians who--
(A) express interest in participating in the pilot
program in the survey conducted under subsection (e);
(B) are in good standing with the Department; and
(C) primarily have clinical responsibilities with
the Department.
(2) Voluntary participation.--Participation in the pilot
program shall be voluntary. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require a physician working for the Department to
assume inpatient responsibilities at a community hospital unless
otherwise required as a term or condition of employment with the
Department.

(g) Assumption of Inpatient Physician Responsibilities.--
(1) In general.--Each eligible physician selected for
participation in the pilot program shall assume and maintain
inpatient responsibilities, including inpatient responsibilities
with respect to nonveterans, at one or more community hospitals
selected by the Secretary for participation in the pilot program
under subsection (d).
(2) Coverage under federal tort claims act.--If an eligible
physician participating in the pilot program carries out on-call
responsibilities at a community hospital where privileges to
practice at such hospital are conditioned upon the provision of
services to individuals who are not veterans while the physician
is on call for such hospital, the provision of such services by
the physician shall be considered an action within the scope of
the physician's office or employment for purposes of chapter 171
of title 28, United States Code (commonly referred to as the
``Federal Tort Claims Act'').

(h) Compensation.--
(1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide each eligible
physician participating in the pilot program with such
compensation (including pay and other appropriate compensation)
as the Secretary considers appropriate to compensate such
physician for the discharge of any inpatient responsibilities by
such physician at a community hospital for which such physician
would not otherwise be compensated by the Department as a full-
time employee of the Department.
(2) Written agreement.--The amount of any compensation to be
provided a physician under the pilot program shall

[[Page 1154]]

be specified in a written agreement entered into by the
Secretary and the physician for purposes of the pilot program.
(3) Treatment of compensation. <> --The
Secretary shall consult with the Director of the Office of
Personnel Management on the inclusion of a provision in the
written agreement required under paragraph (2) that describes
the treatment under Federal law of any compensation provided a
physician under the pilot program, including treatment for
purposes of retirement under the civil service laws.

(i) <> Collections From Third Parties.--In
carrying out the pilot program for the purpose described in subsection
(a)(2), the Secretary shall implement a variety and range of
requirements and mechanisms for the collection from third-party payors
of amounts to reimburse the Department for health care services provided
to nonveterans under the pilot program by eligible physicians
discharging inpatient responsibilities under the pilot program.

(j) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment
of this Act and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to
Congress a report on the pilot program, including the following:
(1) The findings of the Secretary with respect to the pilot
program.
(2) The number of veterans and nonveterans provided
inpatient care by physicians participating in the pilot program.
(3) The amounts payable and collected under subsection (i).

(k) Definitions.--In this section:
(1) Health professional shortage area.--The term ``health
professional shortage area'' has the meaning given the term in
section 332(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
254e(a)).
(2) Inpatient responsibilities.--The term ``inpatient
responsibilities'' means on-call responsibilities customarily
required of a physician by a community hospital as a condition
of granting privileges to the physician to practice in the
hospital.
SEC. 307. <> GRANTS FOR VETERANS SERVICE
ORGANIZATIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION OF HIGHLY
RURAL VETERANS.

(a) Grants Authorized.--
(1) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
establish a grant program to provide innovative transportation
options to veterans in highly rural areas.
(2) Eligible recipients.--The following may be awarded a
grant under this section:
(A) State veterans service agencies.
(B) Veterans service organizations.
(3) Use of funds.--A State veterans service agency or
veterans service organization awarded a grant under this section
may use the grant amount to--
(A) assist veterans in highly rural areas to travel
to Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers; and
(B) otherwise assist in providing transportation in
connection with the provision of medical care to
veterans in highly rural areas.
(4) Maximum amount.--The amount of a grant under this
section may not exceed $50,000.

[[Page 1155]]

(5) No matching requirement.--The recipient of a grant under
this section shall not be required to provide matching funds as
a condition for receiving such grant.

(b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations for--
(1) evaluating grant applications under this section; and
(2) otherwise administering the program established by this
section.

(c) Definitions.--In this section:
(1) Highly rural.--The term ``highly rural'', in the case of
an area, means that the area consists of a county or counties
having a population of less than seven persons per square mile.
(2) Veterans service organization.--The term ``veterans
service organization'' means any organization recognized by the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the representation of veterans
under section 5902 of title 38, United States Code.

(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be
appropriated $3,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014 to
carry out this section.
SEC. 308. MODIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR PARTICIPATION IN PILOT
PROGRAM OF ENHANCED CONTRACT CARE
AUTHORITY FOR HEALTH CARE NEEDS OF CERTAIN
VETERANS.

Subsection (b) of section 403 of the Veterans' Mental Health and
other Care Improvements Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-387; 122 Stat. 4125;
38 U.S.C. 1703 note) is amended to read as follows:
``(b) Covered Veterans.--For purposes of the pilot program under
this section, a covered veteran is any veteran who--
``(1) is--
``(A) enrolled in the system of patient enrollment
established under section 1705(a) of title 38, United
States Code, as of the date of the commencement of the
pilot program under subsection (a)(2); or
``(B) eligible for health care under section
1710(e)(3) of such title; and
``(2) resides in a location that is--
``(A) more than 60 minutes driving distance from the
nearest Department health care facility providing
primary care services, if the veteran is seeking such
services;
``(B) more than 120 minutes driving distance from
the nearest Department health care facility providing
acute hospital care, if the veteran is seeking such
care; or
``(C) more than 240 minutes driving distance from
the nearest Department health care facility providing
tertiary care, if the veteran is seeking such care.''.

[[Page 1156]]

TITLE IV--MENTAL HEALTH CARE MATTERS

SEC. 401. <> ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS OF
THE ARMED FORCES WHO SERVE IN OPERATION
ENDURING FREEDOM OR OPERATION IRAQI
FREEDOM FOR COUNSELING AND SERVICES
THROUGH READJUSTMENT COUNSELING SERVICE.

(a) In General.--Any member of the Armed Forces, including a member
of the National Guard or Reserve, who serves on active duty in the Armed
Forces in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom is
eligible for readjustment counseling and related mental health services
under section 1712A of title 38, United States Code, through the
Readjustment Counseling Service of the Veterans Health Administration.
(b) No Requirement for Current Active Duty Service.--A member of the
Armed Forces who meets the requirements for eligibility for counseling
and services under subsection (a) is entitled to counseling and services
under that subsection regardless of whether or not the member is
currently on active duty in the Armed Forces at the time of receipt of
counseling and services under that subsection.
(c) Regulations.--The eligibility of members of the Armed Forces for
counseling and services under subsection (a) shall be subject to such
regulations as the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs shall jointly prescribe for purposes of this section.
(d) Subject to Availability of Appropriations.--The provision of
counseling and services under subsection (a) shall be subject to the
availability of appropriations for such purpose.
SEC. 402. RESTORATION OF AUTHORITY OF READJUSTMENT COUNSELING
SERVICE TO PROVIDE REFERRAL AND OTHER
ASSISTANCE UPON REQUEST TO FORMER MEMBERS
OF THE ARMED FORCES NOT AUTHORIZED
COUNSELING.

Section 1712A is amended--
(1) by redesignating subsections (c) through (f) as
subsections (d) through (g), respectively; and
(2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new
subsection (c):

``(c) Upon receipt of a request for counseling under this section
from any individual who has been discharged or released from active
military, naval, or air service but who is not otherwise eligible for
such counseling, the Secretary shall--
``(1) provide referral services to assist such individual,
to the maximum extent practicable, in obtaining mental health
care and services from sources outside the Department; and
``(2) if pertinent, advise such individual of such
individual's rights to apply to the appropriate military, naval,
or air service, and to the Department, for review of such
individual's discharge or release from such service.''.
SEC. 403. STUDY ON SUICIDES AMONG VETERANS.

(a) Study Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct
a study to determine the number of veterans who died by suicide between
January 1, 1999, and the date of the enactment of this Act.

[[Page 1157]]

(b) Coordination.--In carrying out the study under subsection (a)
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall coordinate with--
(1) the Secretary of Defense;
(2) veterans service organizations;
(3) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and
(4) State public health offices and veterans agencies.

(c) Report to Congress.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the
Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives a report
on the study required under subsection (a) and the findings of the
Secretary.
(d) Veterans Service Organization Defined.--In this section, the
term ``veterans service organization'' means any organization recognized
by the Secretary for the representation of veterans under section 5902
of title 38, United States Code.

TITLE V--OTHER HEALTH CARE MATTERS

SEC. 501. REPEAL OF CERTAIN ANNUAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

(a) Nurse Pay Report.--Section 7451 is amended--
(1) by striking subsection (f); and
(2) by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (f).

(b) Long-term Planning Report.--
(1) In general.--Section 8107 is repealed.
(2) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections at the
beginning of chapter 81 is amended by striking the item relating
to section 8107.
SEC. 502. SUBMITTAL DATE OF ANNUAL REPORT ON GULF WAR RESEARCH.

Section 707(c)(1) of the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status
Act (title VII of Public Law 102-585; 38 U.S.C. 527 note) is amended by
striking ``Not later than March 1 of each year'' and inserting ``Not
later than July 1, 2010, and July 1 of each of the five following
years''.
SEC. 503. PAYMENT FOR CARE FURNISHED TO CHAMPVA BENEFICIARIES.

Section 1781 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
``(e) Payment by the Secretary under this section on behalf of a
covered beneficiary for medical care shall constitute payment in full
and extinguish any liability on the part of the beneficiary for that
care.''.
SEC. 504. DISCLOSURE OF PATIENT TREATMENT INFORMATION FROM MEDICAL
RECORDS OF PATIENTS LACKING DECISIONMAKING
CAPACITY.

Section 7332(b)(2) is amended by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
``(F)(i) To a representative of a patient who lacks
decision-making capacity, when a practitioner deems the content
of the given record necessary for that representative to make an
informed decision regarding the patient's treatment.

[[Page 1158]]

``(ii) In this subparagraph, the term `representative' means
an individual, organization, or other body authorized under
section 7331 of this title and its implementing regulations to
give informed consent on behalf of a patient who lacks decision-
making capacity.''.
SEC. 505. ENHANCEMENT OF QUALITY MANAGEMENT.

(a) Enhancement of Quality Management Through Quality Management
Officers.--
(1) In general.--Subchapter II of chapter 73 is amended by
inserting after section 7311 the following new section:
``Sec. 7311A. Quality management officers

``(a) <> National Quality Management Officer.--
(1) The Under Secretary for Health shall designate an official of the
Veterans Health Administration to act as the principal quality
management officer for the quality-assurance program required by section
7311 of this title. The official so designated may be known as the
`National Quality Management Officer of the Veterans Health
Administration' (in this section referred to as the `National Quality
Management Officer').

``(2) The National Quality Management Officer shall report directly
to the Under Secretary for Health in the discharge of responsibilities
and duties of the Officer under this section.
``(3) The National Quality Management Officer shall be the official
within the Veterans Health Administration who is principally responsible
for the quality-assurance program referred to in paragraph (1). In
carrying out that responsibility, the Officer shall be responsible for
the following:
``(A) Establishing and enforcing the requirements of the
program referred to in paragraph (1).
``(B) Developing an aggregate quality metric from existing
data sources, such as the Inpatient Evaluation Center of the
Department, the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program,
and the External Peer Review Program of the Veterans Health
Administration, that could be used to assess reliably the
quality of care provided at individual Department medical
centers and associated community based outpatient clinics.
``(C) Ensuring that existing measures of quality, including
measures from the Inpatient Evaluation Center, the National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program, System-Wide Ongoing
Assessment and Review reports of the Department, and Combined
Assessment Program reviews of the Office of Inspector General of
the Department, are monitored routinely and analyzed in a manner
that ensures the timely detection of quality of care issues.
``(D) Encouraging research and development in the area of
quality metrics for the purposes of improving how the Department
measures quality in individual facilities.
``(E) Carrying out such other responsibilities and duties
relating to quality management in the Veterans Health
Administration as the Under Secretary for Health shall specify.

``(4) The requirements under paragraph (3) shall include
requirements regarding the following:
``(A) A confidential system for the submittal of reports by
Veterans Health Administration personnel regarding quality
management at Department facilities.

[[Page 1159]]

``(B) Mechanisms for the peer review of the actions of
individuals appointed in the Veterans Health Administration in
the position of physician.

``(b) <> Quality Management Officers for
VISNs.--(1) The Regional Director of each Veterans Integrated Services
Network shall appoint an official of the Network to act as the quality
management officer of the Network.

``(2) The quality management officer for a Veterans Integrated
Services Network shall report to the Regional Director of the Veterans
Integrated Services Network, and to the National Quality Management
Officer, regarding the discharge of the responsibilities and duties of
the officer under this section.
``(3) The quality management officer for a Veterans Integrated
Services Network shall--
``(A) direct the quality management office in the Network;
and
``(B) coordinate, monitor, and oversee the quality
management programs and activities of the Administration medical
facilities in the Network in order to ensure the thorough and
uniform discharge of quality management requirements under such
programs and activities throughout such facilities.

``(c) <> Quality Management Officers for Medical
Facilities.--(1) The director of each Veterans Health Administration
medical facility shall appoint a quality management officer for that
facility.

``(2) The quality management officer for a facility shall report
directly to the director of the facility, and to the quality management
officer of the Veterans Integrated Services Network in which the
facility is located, regarding the discharge of the responsibilities and
duties of the quality management officer under this section.
``(3) The quality management officer for a facility shall be
responsible for designing, disseminating, and implementing quality
management programs and activities for the facility that meet the
requirements established by the National Quality Management Officer
under subsection (a).
``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) Except as provided in
paragraph (2), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may
be necessary to carry out this section.
``(2) There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the
provisions of subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of subsection (a)(3),
$25,000,000 for the two-year period of fiscal years beginning after the
date of the enactment of this section.''.
(2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the
beginning of chapter 73 is amended by inserting after the item
relating to section 7311 the following new item:

``7311A. Quality management officers.''.

(b) Reports on Quality Concerns Under Quality-assurance Program.--
Section 7311(b) is amended by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
``(4) As part of the quality-assurance program, the Under Secretary
for Health shall establish mechanisms through which employees of
Veterans Health Administration facilities may submit reports, on a
confidential basis, on matters relating to quality of care in Veterans
Health Administration facilities to the quality management officers of
such facilities under section 7311A(c) of

[[Page 1160]]

this title. The mechanisms shall provide for the prompt and thorough
review of any reports so submitted by the receiving officials.''.
(c) Review of Current Health Care Quality Safeguards.--
(1) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
conduct a comprehensive review of all current policies and
protocols of the Department of Veterans Affairs for maintaining
health care quality and patient safety at Department medical
facilities. The review shall include a review and assessment of
the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program, including an
assessment of--
(A) the efficacy of the quality indicators under the
program;
(B) the efficacy of the data collection methods
under the program;
(C) the efficacy of the frequency with which regular
data analyses are performed under the program; and
(D) the extent to which the resources allocated to
the program are adequate to fulfill the stated function
of the program.
(2) Report.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
report on the review conducted under paragraph (1), including
the findings of the Secretary as a result of the review and such
recommendations as the Secretary considers appropriate in light
of the review.
SEC. 506. <> PILOT PROGRAM ON USE OF
COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS AND LOCAL
AND STATE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES TO ENSURE
THAT VETERANS RECEIVE CARE AND BENEFITS
FOR WHICH THEY ARE ELIGIBLE.

(a) Pilot Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
carry out a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of
using community-based organizations and local and State government
entities--
(1) to increase the coordination of community, local, State,
and Federal providers of health care and benefits for veterans
to assist veterans who are transitioning from military service
to civilian life in such transition;
(2) to increase the availability of high quality medical and
mental health services to veterans transitioning from military
service to civilian life;
(3) to provide assistance to families of veterans who are
transitioning from military service to civilian life to help
such families adjust to such transition; and
(4) to provide outreach to veterans and their families to
inform them about the availability of benefits and connect them
with appropriate care and benefit programs.

(b) Duration of Program.--The pilot program shall be carried out
during the 2-year period beginning on the date that is 180 days after
the date of the enactment of this Act.
(c) Program Locations.--
(1) In general.--The pilot program shall be carried out at
five locations selected by the Secretary for purposes of the
pilot program.
(2) Considerations.--In selecting locations for the pilot
program, the Secretary shall consider the advisability of
selecting locations in--

[[Page 1161]]

(A) rural areas;
(B) areas with populations that have a high
proportion of minority group representation;
(C) areas with populations that have a high
proportion of individuals who have limited access to
health care; and
(D) areas that are not in close proximity to an
active duty military installation.

(d) Grants.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program through
the award of grants to community-based organizations and local and State
government entities.
(e) Selection of Grant Recipients.--
(1) In general.--A community-based organization or local or
State government entity seeking a grant under the pilot program
shall submit to the Secretary an application therefor in such
form and in such manner as the Secretary considers appropriate.
(2) Elements.--Each application submitted under paragraph
(1) shall include the following:
(A) A description of the consultations, if any, with
the Department of Veterans Affairs in the development of
the proposal under the application.
(B) A plan to coordinate activities under the pilot
program, to the greatest extent possible, with the
local, State, and Federal providers of services for
veterans to reduce duplication of services and to
enhance the effect of such services.

(f) Use of Grant Funds.--The Secretary shall prescribe appropriate
uses of grant funds received under the pilot program.
(g) Report on Program.--
(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the
completion of the pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to
Congress a report on the pilot program.
(2) Elements.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall
include the following:
(A) The findings and conclusions of the Secretary
with respect to the pilot program.
(B) An assessment of the benefits to veterans of the
pilot program.
(C) The recommendations of the Secretary as to the
advisability of continuing the pilot program.
SEC. 507. SPECIALIZED RESIDENTIAL CARE AND REHABILITATION FOR
CERTAIN VETERANS.

Section 1720 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
``(g) The Secretary may contract with appropriate entities to
provide specialized residential care and rehabilitation services to a
veteran of Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom who the
Secretary determines suffers from a traumatic brain injury, has an
accumulation of deficits in activities of daily living and instrumental
activities of daily living, and because of these deficits, would
otherwise require admission to a nursing home even though such care
would generally exceed the veteran's nursing needs.''.

[[Page 1162]]

SEC. 508. EXPANDED STUDY ON THE HEALTH IMPACT OF PROJECT SHIPBOARD
HAZARD AND DEFENSE.

(a) In General. <> --Not later than 90 days after
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs
shall enter into a contract with the Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies to conduct an expanded study on the health impact of
Project Shipboard Hazard and Defense (Project SHAD).

(b) Covered Veterans.--The study required by subsection (a) shall
include, to the extent practicable, all veterans who participated in
Project Shipboard Hazard and Defense.
(c) Use of Existing Studies.--The study required by subsection (a)
may use results from the study covered in the report titled ``Long-Term
Health Effects of Participation in Project SHAD'' of the Institute of
Medicine of the National Academies.
SEC. 509. USE OF NON-DEPARTMENT FACILITIES FOR REHABILITATION OF
INDIVIDUALS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY.

Section 1710E is amended--
(1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c);
(2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new
subsection (b):

``(b) Covered Individuals.--The care and services provided under
subsection (a) shall be made available to an individual--
``(1) who is described in section 1710C(a) of this title;
and
``(2)(A) to whom the Secretary is unable to provide such
treatment or services at the frequency or for the duration
prescribed in such plan; or
``(B) for whom the Secretary determines that it is optimal
with respect to the recovery and rehabilitation for such
individual.''; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(d) Standards.--The Secretary may not provide treatment or
services as described in subsection (a) at a non-Department facility
under such subsection unless such facility maintains standards for the
provision of such treatment or services established by an independent,
peer-reviewed organization that accredits specialized rehabilitation
programs for adults with traumatic brain injury.''.
SEC. 510. <> PILOT PROGRAM ON PROVISION
OF DENTAL INSURANCE PLANS TO VETERANS AND
SURVIVORS AND DEPENDENTS OF VETERANS.

(a) Pilot Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall
carry out a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of
providing a dental insurance plan to veterans and survivors and
dependents of veterans described in subsection (b).
(b) Covered Veterans and Survivors and Dependents.--The veterans and
survivors and dependents of veterans described in this subsection are as
follows:
(1) Any veteran who is enrolled in the system of annual
patient enrollment under section 1705 of title 38, United States
Code.
(2) Any survivor or dependent of a veteran who is eligible
for medical care under section 1781 of such title.

[[Page 1163]]

(c) Duration of Program.--The pilot program shall be carried out
during the 3-year period beginning on the date that is 270 days after
the date of the enactment of this Act.
(d) Locations.--The pilot program shall be carried out in such
Veterans Integrated Services Networks as the Secretary considers
appropriate for purposes of the pilot program.
(e) Administration.--The Secretary shall contract with a dental
insurer to administer the dental insurance plan provided under the pilot
program.
(f) Benefits.--The dental insurance plan under the pilot program
shall provide such benefits for dental care and treatment as the
Secretary considers appropriate for the dental insurance plan, including
diagnostic services, preventative services, endodontics and other
restorative services, surgical services, and emergency services.
(g) Enrollment.--
(1) Voluntary.--Enrollment in the dental insurance plan
under the pilot program shall be voluntary.
(2) Minimum period.--Enrollment in the dental insurance plan
shall be for such minimum period as the Secretary shall
prescribe for purposes of this section.

(h) Premiums.--
(1) In general.--Premiums for coverage under the dental
insurance plan under the pilot program shall be in such amount
or amounts as the Secretary shall prescribe to cover all costs
associated with the pilot program.
(2) Annual adjustment.--The Secretary shall adjust the
premiums payable under the pilot program for coverage under the
dental insurance plan on an annual basis. Each individual
covered by the dental insurance plan at the time of such an
adjustment shall be notified of the amount and effective date of
such adjustment.
(3) Responsibility for payment.--Each individual covered by
the dental insurance plan shall pay the entire premium for
coverage under the dental insurance plan, in addition to the
full cost of any copayments.

(i) Voluntary Disenrollment.--
(1) In general.--With respect to enrollment in the dental
insurance plan under the pilot program, the Secretary shall--
(A) <> permit the voluntary
disenrollment of an individual in the dental insurance
plan if the disenrollment occurs during the 30-day
period beginning on the date of the enrollment of the
individual in the dental insurance plan; and
(B) permit the voluntary disenrollment of an
individual in the dental insurance plan for such
circumstances as the Secretary shall prescribe for
purposes of this subsection, but only to the extent such
disenrollment does not jeopardize the fiscal integrity
of the dental insurance plan.
(2) Allowable circumstances.--The circumstances prescribed
under paragraph (1)(B) shall include the following:
(A) If an individual enrolled in the dental
insurance plan relocates to a location outside the
jurisdiction of the dental insurance plan that prevents
use of the benefits under the dental insurance plan.

[[Page 1164]]

(B) If an individual enrolled in the dental
insurance plan is prevented by a serious medical
condition from being able to obtain benefits under the
dental insurance plan.
(C) Such other circumstances as the Secretary shall
prescribe for purposes of this subsection.
(3) Establishment of procedures.--The Secretary shall
establish procedures for determinations on the permissibility of
voluntary disenrollments under paragraph (1)(B). Such procedures
shall ensure timely determinations on the permissibility of such
disenrollments.

(j) Relationship to Dental Care Provided by Secretary.--Nothing in
this section shall affect the responsibility of the Secretary to provide
dental care under section 1712 of title 38, United States Code, and the
participation of an individual in the dental insurance plan under the
pilot program shall not affect the individual's entitlement to
outpatient dental services and treatment, and related dental appliances,
under that section.
(k) Regulations.--The dental insurance plan under the pilot program
shall be administered under such regulations as the Secretary shall
prescribe.
SEC. 511. PROHIBITION ON COLLECTION OF COPAYMENTS FROM VETERANS
WHO ARE CATASTROPHICALLY DISABLED.

(a) In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 17 is amended by adding
at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 1730A. Prohibition on collection of copayments from
catastrophically disabled veterans

``Notwithstanding subsections (f) and (g) of section 1710 and
section 1722A(a) of this title or any other provision of law, the
Secretary may not require a veteran who is catastrophically disabled, as
defined by the Secretary, to make any copayment for the receipt of
hospital care or medical services under the laws administered by the
Secretary.''.
(b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 17 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
1730 the following new item:

``1730A. Prohibition on collection of copayments from catastrophically
disabled veterans.''.

SEC. 512. HIGHER PRIORITY STATUS FOR CERTAIN VETERANS WHO ARE
MEDAL OF HONOR RECIPIENTS.

Section 1705(a)(3) is amended by inserting ``veterans who were
awarded the medal of honor under section 3741, 6241, or 8741 of title 10
or section 491 of title 14,'' after ``the Purple Heart,''.
SEC. 513. HOSPITAL CARE, MEDICAL SERVICES, AND NURSING HOME CARE
FOR CERTAIN VIETNAM-ERA VETERANS EXPOSED
TO HERBICIDE AND VETERANS OF THE PERSIAN
GULF WAR.

Section 1710(e) is amended--
(1) in paragraph (3)--
(A) by striking ``subsection (a)(2)(F)--'' and all
that follows through ``(C) in the case'' and inserting
``subsection (a)(2)(F) in the case''; and
(B) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) of the
former subparagraph (C) as subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
such paragraph (3) and by realigning the margin of such
new subparagraphs two ems to the left; and

[[Page 1165]]

(2) in paragraph (1)(C)--
(A) by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' and
inserting ``paragraph (2)''; and
(B) by inserting after ``on active duty'' the
following: ``between August 2, 1990, and November 11,
1998,''.
SEC. 514. ESTABLISHMENT OF DIRECTOR OF PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
SERVICES IN VETERANS HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION.

(a) In General.--Section 7306(a) is amended by striking paragraph
(9) and inserting the following new paragraph (9):
``(9) The Director of Physician Assistant Services, who
shall--
``(A) serve in a full-time capacity at the Central
Office of the Department;
``(B) be a qualified physician assistant; and
``(C) be responsible and report directly to the
Chief Patient Care Services Officer of the Veterans
Health Administration on all matters relating to the
education and training, employment, appropriate use, and
optimal participation of physician assistants within the
programs and initiatives of the Administration.''.

(b) <> Deadline for Implementation.--The
Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that an individual is serving
as the Director of Physician Assistant Services under paragraph (9) of
section 7306(a) of title 38, United States Code, as amended by
subsection (a), by not later than 120 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act.
SEC. 515. COMMITTEE ON CARE OF VETERANS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY.

(a) Establishment of Committee.--Subchapter II of chapter 73 is
amended by inserting after section 7321 the following new section:
``Sec. 7321A. Committee on Care of Veterans with Traumatic Brain
Injury

``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish in the Veterans
Health Administration a committee to be known as the `Committee on Care
of Veterans with Traumatic Brain Injury'. The Under Secretary for Health
shall appoint employees of the Department with expertise in the care of
veterans with traumatic brain injury to serve on the committee.
``(b) Responsibilities of Committee.--The committee shall assess,
and carry out a continuing assessment of, the capability of the Veterans
Health Administration to meet effectively the treatment and
rehabilitation needs of veterans with traumatic brain injury. In
carrying out that responsibility, the committee shall--
``(1) evaluate the care provided to such veterans through
the Veterans Health Administration;
``(2) identify systemwide problems in caring for such
veterans in facilities of the Veterans Health Administration;
``(3) identify specific facilities within the Veterans
Health Administration at which program enrichment is needed to
improve treatment and rehabilitation of such veterans; and
``(4) identify model programs which the committee considers
to have been successful in the treatment and rehabilitation of
such veterans and which should be implemented more widely in or
through facilities of the Veterans Health Administration.

[[Page 1166]]

``(c) Advice and Recommendations.--The committee shall--
``(1) advise the Under Secretary regarding the development
of policies for the care and rehabilitation of veterans with
traumatic brain injury; and
``(2) make recommendations to the Under Secretary--
``(A) for improving programs of care of such
veterans at specific facilities and throughout the
Veterans Health Administration;
``(B) for establishing special programs of education
and training relevant to the care of such veterans for
employees of the Veterans Health Administration;
``(C) regarding research needs and priorities
relevant to the care of such veterans; and
``(D) regarding the appropriate allocation of
resources for all such activities.

``(d) Annual Report.--Not later than June 1, 2010, and each year
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans'
Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the
House of Representatives a report on the implementation of this section.
Each such report shall include the following for the calendar year
preceding the year in which the report is submitted:
``(1) A list of the members of the committee.
``(2) The assessment of the Under Secretary for Health,
after review of the findings of the committee, regarding the
capability of the Veterans Health Administration, on a
systemwide and facility-by-facility basis, to meet effectively
the treatment and rehabilitation needs of veterans with
traumatic brain injury.
``(3) The plans of the committee for further assessments.
``(4) The findings and recommendations made by the committee
to the Under Secretary for Health and the views of the Under
Secretary on such findings and recommendations.
``(5) A description of the steps taken, plans made (and a
timetable for the execution of such plans), and resources to be
applied toward improving the capability of the Veterans Health
Administration to meet effectively the treatment and
rehabilitation needs of veterans with traumatic brain injury.''.

(b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 73 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
7321 the following new item:

``7321A. Committee on Care of Veterans with Traumatic Brain Injury.''.

SEC. 516. INCREASE IN AMOUNT AVAILABLE TO DISABLED VETERANS FOR
IMPROVEMENTS AND STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS
FURNISHED AS PART OF HOME HEALTH SERVICES.

(a) Increase.--Section 1717(a)(2) is amended by striking
subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting the following:
``(A) in the case of medical services furnished under
section 1710(a)(1) of this title, or for a disability described
in section 1710(a)(2)(C) of this title--
``(i) in the case of a veteran who first applies for
benefits under this paragraph before the date of the
Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services Act of
2010, $4,100; or
``(ii) in the case of a veteran who first applies
for benefits under this paragraph on or after the date
of the

[[Page 1167]]

Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services Act of
2010, $6,800; and
``(B) in the case of medical services furnished under any
other provision of section 1710(a) of this title--
``(i) in the case of a veteran who first applies for
benefits under this paragraph before the date of the
Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services Act of
2010, $1,200; or
``(ii) in the case of a veteran who first applies
for benefits under this paragraph on or after the date
of the Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services
Act of 2010, $2,000.''.

(b) <> Construction.--A veteran who
exhausts such veteran's eligibility for benefits under section
1717(a)(2) of such title before the date of the enactment of this Act,
is not entitled to additional benefits under such section by reason of
the amendments made by subsection (a).
SEC. 517. EXTENSION OF STATUTORILY DEFINED COPAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN
VETERANS FOR HOSPITAL CARE AND NURSING
HOME CARE.

Subparagraph (B) of section 1710(f)(2) is amended to read as
follows:
``(B) before September 30, 2012, an amount equal to
$10 for every day the veteran receives hospital care and
$5 for every day the veteran receives nursing home
care.''.
SEC. 518. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO RECOVER COST OF CERTAIN CARE
AND SERVICES FROM DISABLED VETERANS WITH
HEALTH-PLAN CONTRACTS.

Subparagraph (E) of section 1729(a)(2) is amended to read as
follows:
``(E) for which care and services are furnished
before October 1, 2012, under this chapter to a veteran
who--
``(i) has a service-connected disability; and
``(ii) is entitled to care (or payment of the
expenses of care) under a health-plan contract.''.

TITLE VI--DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL MATTERS

SEC. 601. ENHANCEMENT OF AUTHORITIES FOR RETENTION OF MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS.

(a) Secretarial Authority To Extend Title 38 Status to Additional
Positions.--
(1) In general.--Paragraph (3) of section 7401 is amended by
striking ``and blind rehabilitation outpatient specialists.''
and inserting the following: ``blind rehabilitation outpatient
specialists, and such other classes of health care occupations
as the Secretary considers necessary for the recruitment and
retention needs of the Department subject to the following
requirements:
``(A) Such other classes of health care
occupations--
``(i) are not occupations relating to
administrative, clerical, or physical plant
maintenance and protective services;

[[Page 1168]]

``(ii) that would otherwise receive basic pay
in accordance with the General Schedule under
section 5332 of title 5;
``(iii) provide, as determined by the
Secretary, direct patient care services or
services incident to direct patient services; and
``(iv) would not otherwise be available to
provide medical care or treatment for veterans.
``(B) <> Not later
than 45 days before the Secretary appoints any personnel
for a class of health care occupations that is not
specifically listed in this paragraph, the Secretary
shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate, the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the
House of Representatives, and the Office of Management
and Budget notice of such appointment.
``(C) Before submitting notice under subparagraph
(B), the Secretary shall solicit comments from any labor
organization representing employees in such class and
include such comments in such notice.''.
(2) Appointment of nurse assistants.--Such paragraph is
further amended by inserting ``nurse assistants,'' after
``licensed practical or vocational nurses,''.

(b) Probationary Periods for Registered Nurses.--Section 7403(b) is
amended--
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Appointments'' and
inserting ``Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
appointments'';
(2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (4); and
(3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new
paragraphs:

``(2) With respect to the appointment of a registered nurse under
this chapter, paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to such appointment
regardless of whether such appointment is on a full-time basis or a
part-time basis.
``(3) An appointment described in subsection (a) on a part-time
basis of a person who has previously served on a full-time basis for the
probationary period for the position concerned shall be without a
probationary period.''.
(c) Prohibition on Temporary Part-time Registered Nurse Appointments
in Excess of 2 Years.--Section 7405 is amended by adding at the end the
following new subsection:
``(g)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (3), employment of a
registered nurse on a temporary part-time basis under subsection (a)(1)
shall be for a probationary period of two years.
``(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), upon completion by a
registered nurse of the probationary period described in paragraph (1)--
``(A) the employment of such nurse shall--
``(i) no longer be considered temporary; and
``(ii) be considered an appointment described in
section 7403(a) of this title; and
``(B) the nurse shall be considered to have served the
probationary period required by section 7403(b).

``(3) This subsection shall not apply to appointments made on a term
limited basis of less than or equal to three years of--

[[Page 1169]]

``(A) nurses with a part-time appointment resulting from an
academic affiliation or teaching position in a nursing academy
of the Department;
``(B) nurses appointed as a result of a specific research
proposal or grant; or
``(C) nurses who are not citizens of the United States and
appointed under section 7407(a) of this title.''.

(d) Rate of Basic Pay for Appointees to the Office of the Under
Secretary for Health Set to Rate of Basic Pay for Senior Executive
Service Positions.--
(1) In general.--Section 7404(a) is amended--
(A) by striking ``The annual'' and inserting ``(1)
The annual'';
(B) by striking ``The pay'' and inserting the
following:

``(2) The pay'';
(C) by striking ``under the preceding sentence'' and
inserting ``under paragraph (1)''; and
(D) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:

``(3)(A) The rate of basic pay for a position to which an Executive
order applies under paragraph (1) and is not described by paragraph (2)
shall be set in accordance with section 5382 of title 5 as if such
position were a Senior Executive Service position (as such term is
defined in section 3132(a) of title 5).
``(B) A rate of basic pay for a position may not be set under
subparagraph (A) in excess of--
``(i) in the case the position is not described in clause
(ii), the rate of basic pay payable for level III of the
Executive Schedule; or
``(ii) in the case that the position is covered by a
performance appraisal system that meets the certification
criteria established by regulation under section 5307(d) of
title 5, the rate of basic pay payable for level II of the
Executive Schedule.

``(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d) of section
5307 of title 5, the Secretary may make any certification under that
subsection instead of the Office of Personnel Management and without
concurrence of the Office of Management and Budget.''.
(2) <> Effective date.--The
amendments made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on the first
day of the first pay period beginning after the day that is 180
days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

(e) Special Incentive Pay for Department Pharmacist Executives.--
Section 7410 is amended--
(1) by striking ``The Secretary may'' and inserting the
following:

``(a) In General.--The Secretary may''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(b) Special Incentive Pay for Department Pharmacist Executives.--
(1) In order to recruit and retain highly qualified Department
pharmacist executives, the Secretary may authorize the Under Secretary
for Health to pay special incentive pay of not more than $40,000 per
year to an individual of the Veterans Health Administration who is a
pharmacist executive.
``(2) In determining whether and how much special pay to provide to
such individual, the Under Secretary shall consider the following:
``(A) The grade and step of the position of the individual.

[[Page 1170]]

``(B) The scope and complexity of the position of the
individual.
``(C) The personal qualifications of the individual.
``(D) The characteristics of the labor market concerned.
``(E) Such other factors as the Secretary considers
appropriate.

``(3) Special incentive pay under paragraph (1) for an individual is
in addition to all other pay (including basic pay) and allowances to
which the individual is entitled.
``(4) Except as provided in paragraph (5), special incentive pay
under paragraph (1) for an individual shall be considered basic pay for
all purposes, including retirement benefits under chapters 83 and 84 of
title 5, and other benefits.
``(5) Special incentive pay under paragraph (1) for an individual
shall not be considered basic pay for purposes of adverse actions under
subchapter V of this chapter.
``(6) Special incentive pay under paragraph (1) may not be awarded
to an individual in an amount that would result in an aggregate amount
of pay (including bonuses and awards) received by such individual in a
year under this title that is greater than the annual pay of the
President.''.
(f) Pay for Physicians and Dentists.--
(1) Non-foreign cost of living adjustment allowance.--
Section 7431(b) is amended by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
``(5) The non-foreign cost of living adjustment allowance
authorized under section 5941 of title 5 for physicians and
dentists whose pay is set under this section shall be determined
as a percentage of base pay only.''.
(2) Market pay determinations for physicians and dentists in
administrative or executive leadership positions.--Section
7431(c)(4)(B)(i) is amended by adding at the end the following:
``The Secretary may exempt physicians and dentists occupying
administrative or executive leadership positions from the
requirements of the previous sentence.''.
(3) Exception to prohibition on reduction of market pay.--
Section 7431(c)(7) is amended by striking ``concerned.'' and
inserting ``concerned, unless there is a change in board
certification or reduction of privileges.''.

(g) Adjustment of Pay Cap for Nurses.--Section 7451(c)(2) is amended
by striking ``level V'' and inserting ``level IV''.
(h) Exemption for Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists From
Limitation on Authorized Competitive Pay.--Section 7451(c)(2) is further
amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The maximum
rate of basic pay for a grade for the position of certified registered
nurse anesthetist pursuant to an adjustment under subsection (d) may
exceed the maximum rate otherwise provided in the preceding sentence.''.
(i) Increased Limitation on Special Pay for Nurse Executives.--
Section 7452(g)(2) is amended by striking ``$25,000'' and inserting
``$100,000''.
(j) Locality Pay Scale Computations.--
(1) Education, training, and support for facility directors
in wage surveys.--Section 7451(d)(3) is amended by adding at the
end the following new subparagraph:

``(F) The Under Secretary for Health shall provide appropriate
education, training, and support to directors of Department health

[[Page 1171]]

care facilities in the conduct and use of surveys, including the use of
third-party surveys, under this paragraph.''.
(2) Information on methodology used in wage surveys.--
Section 7451(e)(4) is amended--
(A) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as
subparagraph (E); and
(B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the
following new subparagraph (D):
``(D) In any case in which the director conducts such a wage
survey during the period covered by the report and makes
adjustment in rates of basic pay applicable to one or more
covered positions at the facility, information on the
methodology used in making such adjustment or adjustments.''.
(3) Disclosure of information to persons in covered
positions.--Section 7451(e), as amended by paragraph (2) of this
subsection, is further amended by adding at the end the
following new paragraph:

``(6)(A) <> Upon the request of an individual
described in subparagraph (B) for a report provided under paragraph (4)
with respect to a Department health-care facility, the Under Secretary
for Health or the director of such facility shall provide to the
individual the most current report for such facility provided under such
paragraph.

``(B) An individual described in this subparagraph is--
``(i) an individual in a covered position at a Department
health-care facility; or
``(ii) a representative of the labor organization
representing that individual who is designated by that
individual to make the request.''.

(k) Eligibility of Part-Time Nurses for Additional Nurse Pay.--
(1) In general.--Section 7453 is amended--
(A) in subsection (a), by striking ``a nurse'' and
inserting ``a full-time nurse or part-time nurse'';
(B) in subsection (b)--
(i) in the first sentence--
(I) by striking ``on a tour of
duty'';
(II) by striking ``service on such
tour'' and inserting ``such service'';
and
(III) by striking ``of such tour''
and inserting ``of such service''; and
(ii) in the second sentence, by striking ``of
such tour'' and inserting ``of such service'';
(C) in subsection (c)--
(i) by striking ``on a tour of duty''; and
(ii) by striking ``service on such tour'' and
inserting ``such service''; and
(D) in subsection (e)--
(i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``eight
hours in a day'' and inserting ``eight consecutive
hours''; and
(ii) in paragraph (5)(A), by striking ``tour
of duty'' and inserting ``period of service''.
(2) Exclusion of application of additional nurse pay
provisions to certain additional employees.--Paragraph (3) of
section 7454(b) is amended to read as follows:

``(3) <> Employees appointed under section 7408
of this title performing service on a tour of duty, any part of which is
within the period commencing at midnight Friday and ending at midnight

[[Page 1172]]

Sunday, shall receive additional pay in addition to the rate of basic
pay provided such employees for each hour of service on such tour at a
rate equal to 25 percent of such employee's hourly rate of basic pay.''.

(l) Enhanced Authority To Increase Rates of Basic Pay To Obtain or
Retain Services of Certain Persons.--Section 7455(c) is amended to read
as follows:
``(c)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the amount of any increase under
subsection (a) in the minimum rate for any grade may not (except in the
case of nurse anesthetists, licensed practical nurses, licensed
vocational nurses, nursing positions otherwise covered by title 5,
pharmacists, and licensed physical therapists) exceed the maximum rate
of basic pay (excluding any locality-based comparability payment under
section 5304 of title 5 or similar provision of law) for the grade or
level by more than 30 percent.
``(2) No rate may be established under this section in excess of the
rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule.''.
SEC. 602. LIMITATIONS ON OVERTIME DUTY, WEEKEND DUTY, AND
ALTERNATIVE WORK SCHEDULES FOR NURSES.

(a) Overtime Duty.--
(1) In general.--Subchapter IV of chapter 74 is amended by
adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 7459. Nursing staff: special rules for overtime duty

``(a) Limitation.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the
Secretary may not require nursing staff to work more than 40 hours (or
24 hours if such staff is covered under section 7456 of this title) in
an administrative work week or more than eight consecutive hours (or 12
hours if such staff is covered under section 7456 or 7456A of this
title).
``(b) Voluntary Overtime.--(1) Nursing staff may on a voluntary
basis elect to work hours otherwise prohibited by subsection (a).
``(2) The refusal of nursing staff to work hours prohibited by
subsection (a) shall not be grounds--
``(A) to discriminate (within the meaning of section 704(a)
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-3(a))) against
the staff;
``(B) to dismiss or discharge the staff; or
``(C) for any other adverse personnel action against the
staff.

``(c) Overtime Under Emergency Circumstances.--(1) Subject to
paragraph (2), the Secretary may require nursing staff to work hours
otherwise prohibited by subsection (a) if--
``(A) the work is a consequence of an emergency that could
not have been reasonably anticipated;
``(B) the emergency is non-recurring and is not caused by or
aggravated by the inattention of the Secretary or lack of
reasonable contingency planning by the Secretary;
``(C) the Secretary has exhausted all good faith, reasonable
attempts to obtain voluntary workers;
``(D) the nurse staff have critical skills and expertise
that are required for the work; and

[[Page 1173]]

``(E) the work involves work for which the standard of care
for a patient assignment requires continuity of care through
completion of a case, treatment, or procedure.

``(2) Nursing staff may not be required to work hours under this
subsection after the requirement for a direct role by the staff in
responding to medical needs resulting from the emergency ends.
``(d) Nursing Staff Defined.--In this section, the term `nursing
staff' includes the following:
``(1) A registered nurse.
``(2) A licensed practical or vocational nurse.
``(3) A nurse assistant appointed under this chapter or
title 5.
``(4) Any other nurse position designated by the Secretary
for purposes of this section.''.
(2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the
beginning of chapter 74 is amended by inserting after the item
relating to section 7458 the following new item:

``7459. Nursing staff: special rules for overtime duty.''.

(b) Weekend Duty.--Section 7456 is amended--
(1) by striking subsection (c); and
(2) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (c).

(c) Alternate Work Schedules.--
(1) In general.--Section 7456A(b)(1)(A) is amended by
striking ``three regularly scheduled'' and all that follows
through the period at the end and inserting ``six regularly
scheduled 12-hour tours of duty within a 14-day period shall be
considered for all purposes to have worked a full 80-hour pay
period.''.
(2) Conforming amendments.--Section 7456A(b) is amended--
(A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``36/40''
and inserting ``72/80'';
(B) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``40-hour basic
work week'' and inserting ``80-hour pay period''; and
(C) in paragraph (3), by striking ``regularly''.
SEC. 603. REAUTHORIZATION OF HEALTH PROFESSIONALS EDUCATIONAL
ASSISTANCE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.

(a) In General.--Section 7618 is amended by striking ``December 31,
1998'' and inserting ``December 31, 2014''.
(b) Expansion of Eligibility Requirements.--Section 7612(b)(2) is
amended by striking ``(under section'' and all that follows through ``or
vocational nurse.'' and inserting the following: ``as an appointee under
paragraph (1) or (3) of section 7401 of this title.''.
(c) Additional Program Requirements.--Subchapter II of chapter 76,
as amended by subsections (a) and (b), is further amended--
(1) by redesignating section 7618 as section 7619; and
(2) by inserting after section 7617 the following new
section:
``Sec. 7618. Additional program requirements

``(a) Program Modification.--Notwithstanding any provision of this
subchapter, the Secretary shall carry out this subchapter after the date
of the enactment of this section by modifying the Scholarship Program in
such a manner that the program and hiring

[[Page 1174]]

processes are designed to fully employ Scholarship Program graduates as
soon as possible, if not immediately, upon graduation and completion of
necessary certifications, and to actively assist and monitor graduates
to ensure certifications are obtained in a minimal amount of time
following graduation.
``(b) Clinical Tours.--The Secretary shall require participants in
the Scholarship Program to perform clinical tours in assignments or
locations determined by the Secretary while the participants are
enrolled in the course of education or training for which the
scholarship is provided.
``(c) Mentors.--The Secretary shall ensure that at the commencement
of the period of obligated service of a participant in the Scholarship
Program, the participant is assigned to a mentor who is employed in the
same facility where the participant performs such service.''.
(d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 76 is amended by striking the item relating to section 7618 and
inserting the following new items:

``7618. Additional program requirements.
``7619. Expiration of program.''.

SEC. 604. <> LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR
CLINICAL RESEARCHERS FROM DISADVANTAGED
BACKGROUNDS.

(a) In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may, in
consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, use the
authorities available in section 487E of the Public Health Service Act
(42 U.S.C. 288-5) for the repayment of the principal and interest of
educational loans of appropriately qualified health professionals who
are from disadvantaged backgrounds in order to secure clinical research
by such professionals for the Veterans Health Administration.
(b) Limitations.--The exercise by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs
of the authorities referred to in subsection (a) shall be subject to the
conditions and limitations specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) of
section 487E(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 288-5(a)(2)
and (3)).
(c) Funding.--Amounts for the repayment of principal and interest of
educational loans under this section shall be derived from amounts
available to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the Veterans Health
Administration for Medical Services.

TITLE VII--HOMELESS VETERANS MATTERS

SEC. 701. PER DIEM GRANT PAYMENTS TO NONCONFORMING ENTITIES.

Section 2012 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
``(d) Per Diem Payments to Nonconforming Entities.--(1) The
Secretary may make funds available for per diem payments under this
section to the following grant recipients or eligible entities:
``(A) Grant recipients or eligible entities that--
``(i) meet each of the transitional and supportive
services criteria prescribed by the Secretary pursuant
to subsection (a)(1); and

[[Page 1175]]

``(ii) furnish services to homeless individuals, of
which less than 75 percent are veterans.
``(B) Grant recipients or eligible entities that--
``(i) meet at least one, but not all, of the
transitional and supportive services criteria prescribed
by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (a)(1); and
``(ii) furnish services to homeless individuals, of
which not less than 75 percent are veterans.
``(C) Grant recipients or eligible entities that--
``(i) meet at least one, but not all, of the
transitional and supportive services criteria prescribed
by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (a)(1); and
``(ii) furnish services to homeless individuals, of
which less than 75 percent are veterans.

``(2) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2), in providing per diem
payments under this subsection, the Secretary shall determine the rate
of such per diem payments in accordance with the following order of
priority:
``(A) Grant recipients or eligible entities described by
paragraph (1)(A).
``(B) Grant recipients or eligible entities described by
paragraph (1)(B).
``(C) Grant recipients or eligible entities described by
paragraph (1)(C).

``(3) For purposes of this subsection, an eligible entity is a
nonprofit entity and may be an entity that is ineligible to receive a
grant under section 2011 of this title, but whom the Secretary
determines carries out the purposes described in that section.''.

TITLE VIII--NONPROFIT RESEARCH AND EDUCATION CORPORATIONS

SEC. 801. GENERAL AUTHORITIES ON ESTABLISHMENT OF CORPORATIONS.

(a) Authorization of Multi-medical Center Research Corporations.--
(1) In general.--Section 7361 is amended--
(A) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection
(e); and
(B) by inserting after subsection (a) the following
new subsection (b):

``(b)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a corporation established under
this subchapter may facilitate the conduct of research, education, or
both at more than one medical center. Such a corporation shall be known
as a `multi-medical center research corporation'.
``(2) The board of directors of a multi-medical center research
corporation under this subsection shall include the official at each
Department medical center concerned who is, or who carries out the
responsibilities of, the medical center director of such center as
specified in section 7363(a)(1)(A)(i) of this title.
``(3) In facilitating the conduct of research, education, or both at
more than one Department medical center under this subchapter, a multi-
medical center research corporation may administer receipts and
expenditures relating to such research, education, or both, as
applicable, performed at the Department medical centers concerned.''.

[[Page 1176]]

(2) Expansion of existing corporations to multi-medical
center research corporations.--Such section is further amended
by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(f) A corporation established under this subchapter may act as a
multi-medical center research corporation under this subchapter in
accordance with subsection (b) if--
``(1) the board of directors of the corporation approves a
resolution permitting facilitation by the corporation of the
conduct of research, education, or both at the other Department
medical center or medical centers concerned; and
``(2) the Secretary approves the resolution of the
corporation under paragraph (1).''.

(b) Restatement and Modification of Authorities on Applicability of
State Law.--
(1) In general.--Section 7361 as amended by subsection (a)
of this section, is further amended by inserting after
subsection (b) the following new subsection (c):

``(c) Any corporation established under this subchapter shall be
established in accordance with the nonprofit corporation laws of the
State in which the applicable Department medical center is located and
shall, to the extent not inconsistent with any Federal law, be subject
to the laws of such State. In the case of any multi-medical center
research corporation that facilitates the conduct of research,
education, or both at Department medical centers located in different
States, the corporation shall be established in accordance with the
nonprofit corporation laws of the State in which one of such Department
medical centers is located.''.
(2) <> Conforming amendment.--Section 7365 is
repealed.

(c) Clarification of Status of Corporations.--Section 7361, as
amended by this section, is further amended--
(1) in subsection (a), by striking the second sentence; and
(2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new
subsection (d):

``(d)(1) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter or under
regulations prescribed by the Secretary, any corporation established
under this subchapter, and its officers, directors, and employees, shall
be required to comply only with those Federal laws, regulations, and
executive orders and directives that apply generally to private
nonprofit corporations.
``(2) A corporation under this subchapter is not--
``(A) owned or controlled by the United States; or
``(B) an agency or instrumentality of the United States.''.

(d) Reinstatement of Requirement for 501(c)(3) Status of
Corporations.--Subsection (e) of section 7361, as redesignated by
subsection (a)(1), is further amended by inserting ``section 501(c)(3)
of'' after ``exempt from taxation under''.
SEC. 802. CLARIFICATION OF PURPOSES OF CORPORATIONS.

(a) Clarification of Purposes.--Subsection (a) of section 7362 is
amended in the first sentence--
(1) by striking ``Any corporation'' and all that follows
through ``facilitate'' and inserting ``A corporation established
under this subchapter shall be established to provide a flexible
funding mechanism for the conduct of approved research and
education at one or more Department medical centers and to
facilitate functions related to the conduct of''; and

[[Page 1177]]

(2) by inserting before the period at the end the following:
``or centers''.

(b) Modification of Defined Term Relating to Education and
Training.--Subsection (b) of such section is amended in the matter
preceding paragraph (1) by striking ``the term `education and
training''' and inserting ``the term `education' includes education and
training and''.
(c) Repeal of Role of Corporations With Respect to Fellowships.--
Paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of such section is amended by striking
the flush matter following subparagraph (C).
(d) Availability of Education for Families of Veteran Patients.--
Paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of such section is amended by striking
``to patients and to the families'' and inserting ``and includes
education and training for patients and families''.
SEC. 803. MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS FOR BOARDS OF DIRECTORS OF
CORPORATIONS.

(a) Requirements for Department Board Members.--Paragraph (1) of
section 7363(a) is amended to read as follows:
``(1) with respect to the Department medical center--
``(A)(i) the director (or directors of each
Department medical center, in the case of a multi-
medical center research corporation);
``(ii) the chief of staff; and
``(iii) as appropriate for the activities of such
corporation, the associate chief of staff for research
and the associate chief of staff for education; or
``(B) in the case of a Department medical center at
which one or more of the positions referred to in
subparagraph (A) do not exist, the official or officials
who are responsible for carrying out the
responsibilities of such position or positions at the
Department medical center; and''.

(b) Requirements for Non-department Board Members.--Paragraph (2) of
such section is amended--
(1) by inserting ``not less than two'' before ``members'';
and
(2) by striking ``and who'' and all that follows through the
period at the end and inserting ``and who have backgrounds, or
business, legal, financial, medical, or scientific expertise, of
benefit to the operations of the corporation.''.

(c) Conflicts of Interest.--Subsection (c) of section 7363 is
amended by striking ``, employed by, or have any other financial
relationship with'' and inserting ``or employed by''.
SEC. 804. CLARIFICATION OF POWERS OF CORPORATIONS.

(a) In General.--Section 7364 is amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 7364. General powers

``(a) In General.--(1) A corporation established under this
subchapter may, solely to carry out the purposes of this subchapter--
``(A) accept, administer, retain, and spend funds derived
from gifts, contributions, grants, fees, reimbursements, and
bequests from individuals and public and private entities;
``(B) enter into contracts and agreements with individuals
and public and private entities;

[[Page 1178]]

``(C) subject to paragraph (2), set fees for education and
training facilitated under section 7362 of this title, and
receive, retain, administer, and spend funds in furtherance of
such education and training;
``(D) reimburse amounts to the applicable appropriation
account of the Department for the Office of General Counsel for
any expenses of that Office in providing legal services
attributable to research and education agreements under this
subchapter; and
``(E) employ such employees as the corporation considers
necessary for such purposes and fix the compensation of such
employees.

``(2) Fees charged pursuant to paragraph (1)(C) for education and
training described in that paragraph to individuals who are officers or
employees of the Department may not be paid for by any funds
appropriated to the Department.
``(3) Amounts reimbursed to the Office of General Counsel under
paragraph (1)(D) shall be available for use by the Office of the General
Counsel only for staff and training, and related travel, for the
provision of legal services described in that paragraph and shall remain
available for such use without fiscal year limitation.
``(b) Transfer and Administration of Funds.--(1) Except as provided
in paragraph (2), any funds received by the Secretary for the conduct of
research or education at a Department medical center or centers, other
than funds appropriated to the Department, may be transferred to and
administered by a corporation established under this subchapter for such
purposes.
``(2) A Department medical center may reimburse the corporation for
all or a portion of the pay, benefits, or both of an employee of the
corporation who is assigned to the Department medical center if the
assignment is carried out pursuant to subchapter VI of chapter 33 of
title 5.
``(3) A Department medical center may retain and use funds provided
to it by a corporation established under this subchapter. Such funds
shall be credited to the applicable appropriation account of the
Department and shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for
the purposes of that account.
``(c) Research Projects.--Except for reasonable and usual
preliminary costs for project planning before its approval, a
corporation established under this subchapter may not spend funds for a
research project unless the project is approved in accordance with
procedures prescribed by the Under Secretary for Health for research
carried out with Department funds. Such procedures shall include a
scientific review process.
``(d) Education Activities.--Except for reasonable and usual
preliminary costs for activity planning before its approval, a
corporation established under this subchapter may not spend funds for an
education activity unless the activity is approved in accordance with
procedures prescribed by the Under Secretary for Health.
``(e) Policies and Procedures.--The Under Secretary for Health may
prescribe policies and procedures to guide the spending of funds by
corporations established under this subchapter that are consistent with
the purpose of such corporations as flexible funding mechanisms and with
Federal and State laws and regulations, and executive orders, circulars,
and directives that apply generally to the receipt and expenditure of
funds by nonprofit

[[Page 1179]]

organizations exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
(b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 7362(a), as amended by section
802(a)(1) of this Act, is further amended by striking the last sentence.
SEC. 805. REDESIGNATION OF SECTION 7364A OF TITLE 38, UNITED
STATES CODE.

(a) Redesignation.--Section 7364A is redesignated as section 7365.
(b) Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of
chapter 73 is amended--
(1) by striking the item relating to section 7364A; and
(2) by striking the item relating to section 7365 and
inserting the following new item:

``7365. Coverage of employees under certain Federal tort claims laws.''.

SEC. 806. IMPROVED ACCOUNTABILITY AND OVERSIGHT OF CORPORATIONS.

(a) Additional Information in Annual Reports.--Subsection (b) of
section 7366 is amended to read as follows:
``(b)(1) Each corporation shall submit to the Secretary each year a
report providing a detailed statement of the operations, activities, and
accomplishments of the corporation during that year.
``(2)(A) A corporation with revenues in excess of $500,000 for any
year shall obtain an audit of the corporation for that year.
``(B) A corporation with annual revenues between $100,000 and
$500,000 shall obtain an audit of the corporation at least once every
three years.
``(C) Any audit under this paragraph shall be performed by an
independent auditor.
``(3) The corporation shall include in each report to the Secretary
under paragraph (1) the following:
``(A) The most recent audit of the corporation under
paragraph (2).
``(B) The most recent Internal Revenue Service Form 990
`Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax' or equivalent
and the applicable schedules under such form.''.

(b) Conflict of Interest Policies.--Subsection (c) of such section
is amended to read as follows:
``(c) Each director, officer, and employee of a corporation
established under this subchapter shall be subject to a conflict of
interest policy adopted by that corporation.''.
(c) Establishment of Appropriate Payee Reporting Threshold.--
Subsection (d)(3)(C) of such section is amended by striking ``$35,000''
and inserting ``$50,000''.

TITLE IX--CONSTRUCTION AND NAMING MATTERS

SEC. 901. AUTHORIZATION OF MEDICAL FACILITY PROJECTS.

(a) Authorization of Fiscal Year 2010 Major Medical Facility
Projects.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may carry out the following
major medical facility projects in fiscal year 2010, with each project
to be carried out in the amount specified for such project:

[[Page 1180]]

(1) Construction (including acquisition of land) for the
realignment of services and closure projects at the Department
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Livermore, California, in
an amount not to exceed $55,430,000.
(2) Construction (including acquisition of land) for a new
medical facility at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center in Louisville, Kentucky, in an amount not to exceed
$75,000,000.
(3) Construction (including acquisition of land) for a
clinical expansion for a Mental Health Facility at the
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Dallas, Texas,
in an amount not to exceed $15,640,000.
(4) Construction (including acquisition of land) for a
replacement bed tower and clinical expansion at the Department
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in St. Louis, Missouri, in an
amount not to exceed $43,340,000.

(b) Extension of Authorization for Major Medical Facility
Construction Projects Previously Authorized.--The Secretary of Veterans
Affairs may carry out the following major medical facility projects in
fiscal year 2010, as follows with each project to be carried out in the
amount specified for such project:
(1) Replacement of the existing Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in Denver, Colorado, in an amount not to
exceed $800,000,000.
(2) Construction of Outpatient and Inpatient Improvements in
Bay Pines, Florida, in an amount not to exceed $194,400,000.

(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--
(1) Authorization of appropriations for construction.--There
is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs for fiscal year 2010, or the year in which funds are
appropriated, for the Construction, Major Projects account--
(A) $189,410,000 for the projects authorized in
subsection (a); and
(B) $994,400,000 for the projects authorized in
subsection (b).
(2) Limitation.--The projects authorized in subsections (a)
and (b) may only be carried out using--
(A) funds appropriated for fiscal year 2010 pursuant
to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (1);
(B) funds available for Construction, Major Projects
for a fiscal year before fiscal year 2010 that remain
available for obligation;
(C) funds available for Construction, Major Projects
for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2010 that remain
available for obligation;
(D) funds appropriated for Construction, Major
Projects for fiscal year 2010 for a category of activity
not specific to a project;
(E) funds appropriated for Construction, Major
Projects for a fiscal year before 2010 for a category of
activity not specific to a project; and
(F) funds appropriated for Construction, Major
Projects for a fiscal year after 2010 for a category of
activity not specific to a project.

[[Page 1181]]

SEC. 902. DESIGNATION OF MERRIL LUNDMAN DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS OUTPATIENT CLINIC, HAVRE, MONTANA.

(a) Designation.--The Department of Veterans Affairs outpatient
clinic in Havre, Montana, shall after the date of the enactment of this
Act be known and designated as the ``Merril Lundman Department of
Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic''.
(b) References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, map,
document, record, or other paper of the United States to the outpatient
clinic referred to in subsection (a) shall be considered to be a
reference to the Merril Lundman Department of Veterans Affairs
Outpatient Clinic.
SEC. 903. DESIGNATION OF WILLIAM C. TALLENT DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS OUTPATIENT CLINIC, KNOXVILLE,
TENNESSEE.

(a) Designation.--The Department of Veterans Affairs Outpatient
Clinic in Knoxville, Tennessee, shall after the date of the enactment of
this Act be known and designated as the ``William C. Tallent Department
of Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic''.
(b) References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, map,
document, record, or other paper of the United States to the outpatient
clinic referred to in subsection (a) shall be considered to be a
reference to the William C. Tallent Department of Veterans Affairs
Outpatient Clinic.
SEC. 904. DESIGNATION OF MAX J. BEILKE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS OUTPATIENT CLINIC, ALEXANDRIA,
MINNESOTA.

(a) Designation.--The Department of Veterans Affairs outpatient
clinic in Alexandria, Minnesota, shall after the date of the enactment
of this Act be known and designated as the ``Max J. Beilke Department of
Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic''.
(b) References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, map,
document, record, or other paper of the United States to the outpatient
clinic referred to in subsection (a) shall be considered to be a
reference to the Max J. Beilke Department of Veterans Affairs Outpatient
Clinic.

TITLE X--OTHER MATTERS

SEC. 1001. EXPANSION OF AUTHORITY FOR DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS POLICE OFFICERS.

Section 902 is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)--
(A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:

``(1) Employees of the Department who are Department police officers
shall, with respect to acts occurring on Department property--
``(A) enforce Federal laws;
``(B) enforce the rules prescribed under section 901 of this
title;
``(C) enforce traffic and motor vehicle laws of a State or
local government (by issuance of a citation for violation of
such laws) within the jurisdiction of which such Department
property is located as authorized by an express grant of
authority under applicable State or local law;

[[Page 1182]]

``(D) carry the appropriate Department-issued weapons,
including firearms, while off Department property in an official
capacity or while in an official travel status;
``(E) conduct investigations, on and off Department
property, of offenses that may have been committed on property
under the original jurisdiction of Department, consistent with
agreements or other consultation with affected Federal, State,
or local law enforcement agencies; and
``(F) carry out, as needed and appropriate, the duties
described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) when engaged in
duties authorized by other Federal statutes.'';
(B) by striking paragraph (2) and redesignating
paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); and
(C) in paragraph (2), as redesignated by
subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, by inserting ``, and
on any arrest warrant issued by competent judicial
authority'' before the period; and
(2) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:

``(c) The powers granted to Department police officers designated
under this section shall be exercised in accordance with guidelines
approved by the Secretary and the Attorney General.''.
SEC. 1002. UNIFORM ALLOWANCE FOR DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
POLICE OFFICERS.

Section 903 is amended--
(1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following
new subsection (b):

``(b)(1) The amount of the allowance that the Secretary may pay
under this section is the lesser of--
``(A) the amount currently allowed as prescribed by the
Office of Personnel Management; or
``(B) estimated costs or actual costs as determined by
periodic surveys conducted by the Department.

``(2) During any fiscal year no officer shall receive more for the
purchase of a uniform described in subsection (a) than the amount
established under this subsection.''; and
(2) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following
new subsection (c):

``(c) The allowance established under subsection (b) shall be paid
at the beginning of a Department police officer's employment for those
appointed on or after October 1, 2010. In the case of any other
Department police officer, an allowance in the amount established under
subsection (b) shall be paid upon the request of the officer.''.
SEC. 1003. SUBMISSION OF REPORTS TO CONGRESS BY SECRETARY OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.

(a) In General.--Chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the
following new section:
``Sec. 118. Submission of reports to Congress in electronic form

``(a) In General.--Whenever the Secretary or any other official of
the Department is required by law to submit to Congress (or any
committee of either chamber of Congress) a report, the Secretary or
other official shall submit to Congress (or such committee) a copy of
the report in an electronic format.

[[Page 1183]]

``(b) Treatment.--The submission of a copy of a report in accordance
with this section shall be treated as meeting any requirement of law to
submit such report to Congress (or any committee of either chamber of
Congress).
``(c) Report Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term
`report' includes any certification, notification, or other
communication in writing.''.
(b) Technical and Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the
beginning of chapter 1 is amended--
(1) by striking the item relating to section 117; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new items:

``117. Advance appropriations for certain medical care accounts.
``118. Reports to Congress: submission in electronic form.''.

SEC. 1004. DETERMINATION OF BUDGETARY EFFECTS FOR PURPOSES OF
COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTORY PAY-AS-YOU-GO
ACT OF 2010.

<> The budgetary effects of this
Act, for the purpose of complying with the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act
of 2010, shall be determined by reference to the latest statement titled
``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO Legislation'' for this Act, submitted for
printing in the Congressional Record by the Chairman of the House Budget
Committee, provided that such statement has been submitted prior to the
vote on passage.

Approved May 5, 2010.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--S. 1963:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD:
Vol. 155 (2009):
Nov. 19, considered and passed
Senate.
Vol. 156 (2010):
Apr. 21, considered and passed
House, amended.
Apr. 22, Senate concurred in House
amendment.
DAILY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS (2010):
May 5, Presidential remarks.

[United States Statutes at Large, Volume 124, 111th Congress, 2nd Session]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov]


Public Law 111-347
111th Congress

An Act


 
To amend the Public Health Service Act to extend and improve protections
and services to individuals directly impacted by the terrorist attack in
New York City on September 11, 2001, and for other
purposes. <>

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, <>
SECTION 1. <> SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF
CONTENTS.

(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``James Zadroga 9/11
Health and Compensation Act of 2010''.
(b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.

TITLE I--WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM

Sec. 101. World Trade Center Health Program.

``TITLE XXXIII--WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM

``Subtitle A--Establishment of Program; Advisory Committee

``Sec. 3301. Establishment of World Trade Center Health Program.
``Sec. 3302. WTC Health Program Scientific/Technical Advisory
Committee; WTC Health Program Steering
Committees.
``Sec. 3303. Education and outreach.
``Sec. 3304. Uniform data collection and analysis.
``Sec. 3305. Clinical Centers of Excellence and Data Centers.
``Sec. 3306. Definitions.

``Subtitle B--Program of Monitoring, Initial Health Evaluations, and
Treatment

``PART 1--WTC Responders

``Sec. 3311. Identification of WTC responders and provision of
WTC-related monitoring services.
``Sec. 3312. Treatment of enrolled WTC responders for WTC-
related health conditions.
``Sec. 3313. National arrangement for benefits for eligible
individuals outside New York.

``PART 2--WTC Survivors

``Sec. 3321. Identification and initial health evaluation of
screening-eligible and certified-eligible
WTC survivors.
``Sec. 3322. Followup monitoring and treatment of certified-
eligible WTC survivors for WTC-related
health conditions.
``Sec. 3323. Followup monitoring and treatment of other
individuals with WTC-related health
conditions.

``PART 3--Payor Provisions

``Sec. 3331. Payment of claims.
``Sec. 3332. Administrative arrangement authority.

``Subtitle C--Research Into Conditions

``Sec. 3341. Research regarding certain health conditions
related to September 11 terrorist attacks.

[[Page 3624]]

``Sec. 3342. World Trade Center Health Registry.

``Subtitle D--Funding

``Sec. 3351. World Trade Center Health Program Fund.

TITLE II--SEPTEMBER 11TH VICTIM COMPENSATION FUND OF 2001

Sec. 201. Definitions.
Sec. 202. Extended and expanded eligibility for compensation.
Sec. 203. Requirement to update regulations.
Sec. 204. Limited liability for certain claims.
Sec. 205. Funding; attorney fees.

TITLE III--REVENUE RELATED PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. Excise tax on foreign procurement.
Sec. 302. Renewal of fees for visa-dependent employers.

TITLE IV--BUDGETARY EFFECTS

Sec. 401. Compliance with Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010.

TITLE I--WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM

SEC. 101. WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM.

The Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the
following new title:

``TITLE XXXIII--WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM

``Subtitle A--Establishment of Program; Advisory Committee

``SEC. 3301. <> ESTABLISHMENT OF WORLD TRADE
CENTER HEALTH PROGRAM.

``(a) In General.--There is hereby established within the Department
of Health and Human Services a program to be known as the World Trade
Center Health Program, which shall be administered by the WTC Program
Administrator, to provide beginning on July 1, 2011--
``(1) medical monitoring and treatment benefits to eligible
emergency responders and recovery and cleanup workers (including
those who are Federal employees) who responded to the September
11, 2001, terrorist attacks; and
``(2) initial health evaluation, monitoring, and treatment
benefits to residents and other building occupants and area
workers in New York City who were directly impacted and
adversely affected by such attacks.

``(b) Components of Program.--The WTC Program includes the following
components:
``(1) Medical monitoring for responders.--Medical monitoring
under section 3311, including clinical examinations and long-
term health monitoring and analysis for enrolled WTC responders
who were likely to have been exposed to airborne toxins that
were released, or to other hazards, as a result of the September
11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

[[Page 3625]]

``(2) Initial health evaluation for survivors.--An initial
health evaluation under section 3321, including an evaluation to
determine eligibility for followup monitoring and treatment.
``(3) Followup monitoring and treatment for wtc-related
health conditions for responders and survivors.--Provision under
sections 3312, 3322, and 3323 of followup monitoring and
treatment and payment, subject to the provisions of subsection
(d), for all medically necessary health and mental health care
expenses of an individual with respect to a WTC-related health
condition (including necessary prescription drugs).
``(4) Outreach.--Establishment under section 3303 of an
education and outreach program to potentially eligible
individuals concerning the benefits under this title.
``(5) Clinical data collection and analysis.--Collection and
analysis under section 3304 of health and mental health data
relating to individuals receiving monitoring or treatment
benefits in a uniform manner in collaboration with the
collection of epidemiological data under section 3342.
``(6) Research on health conditions.--Establishment under
subtitle C of a research program on health conditions resulting
from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

``(c) No Cost Sharing.--Monitoring and treatment benefits and
initial health evaluation benefits are provided under subtitle B without
any deductibles, copayments, or other cost sharing to an enrolled WTC
responder or certified-eligible WTC survivor. Initial health evaluation
benefits are provided under subtitle B without any deductibles,
copayments, or other cost sharing to a screening-eligible WTC survivor.
``(d) Preventing Fraud and Unreasonable Administrative Costs.--
``(1) Fraud.--The Inspector General of the Department of
Health and Human Services shall develop and implement a program
to review the WTC Program's health care expenditures to detect
fraudulent or duplicate billing and payment for inappropriate
services. This title is a Federal health care program (as
defined in section 1128B(f) of the Social Security Act) and is a
health plan (as defined in section 1128C(c) of such Act) for
purposes of applying sections 1128 through 1128E of such Act.
``(2) Unreasonable administrative costs.--The Inspector
General of the Department of Health and Human Services shall
develop and implement a program to review the WTC Program for
unreasonable administrative costs, including with respect to
infrastructure, administration, and claims processing.

``(e) Quality Assurance.--The WTC Program Administrator working with
the Clinical Centers of Excellence shall develop and implement a quality
assurance program for the monitoring and treatment delivered by such
Centers of Excellence and any other participating health care providers.
Such program shall include--
``(1) adherence to monitoring and treatment protocols;
``(2) appropriate diagnostic and treatment referrals for
participants;
``(3) prompt communication of test results to participants;
and

[[Page 3626]]

``(4) such other elements as the Administrator specifies in
consultation with the Clinical Centers of Excellence.

``(f) Annual Program Report.--
``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the end of
each fiscal year in which the WTC Program is in operation, the
WTC Program Administrator shall submit an annual report to the
Congress on the operations of this title for such fiscal year
and for the entire period of operation of the program.
``(2) Contents included in report.--Each annual report under
paragraph (1) shall include at least the following:
``(A) Eligible individuals.--Information for each
clinical program described in paragraph (3)--
``(i) on the number of individuals who applied
for certification under subtitle B and the number
of such individuals who were so certified;
``(ii) of the individuals who were certified,
on the number who received monitoring under the
program and the number of such individuals who
received medical treatment under the program;
``(iii) with respect to individuals so
certified who received such treatment, on the WTC-
related health conditions for which they were
treated; and
``(iv) on the projected number of individuals
who will be certified under subtitle B in the
succeeding fiscal year and the succeeding 10-year
period.
``(B) Monitoring, initial health evaluation, and
treatment costs.--For each clinical program so
described--
``(i) information on the costs of monitoring
and initial health evaluation and the costs of
treatment and on the estimated costs of such
monitoring, evaluation, and treatment in the
succeeding fiscal year; and
``(ii) an estimate of the cost of medical
treatment for WTC-related health conditions that
have been paid for or reimbursed by workers'
compensation, by public or private health plans,
or by New York City under section 3331.
``(C) Administrative costs.--Information on the cost
of administering the program, including costs of program
support, data collection and analysis, and research
conducted under the program.
``(D) Administrative experience.--Information on the
administrative performance of the program, including--
``(i) the performance of the program in
providing timely evaluation of and treatment to
eligible individuals; and
``(ii) a list of the Clinical Centers of
Excellence and other providers that are
participating in the program.
``(E) Scientific reports.--A summary of the findings
of any new scientific reports or studies on the health
effects associated with exposure described in section
3306(1), including the findings of research conducted
under section 3341(a).
``(F) Advisory committee recommendations.--A list of
recommendations by the WTC Scientific/Technical Advisory
Committee on additional WTC Program eligibility

[[Page 3627]]

criteria and on additional WTC-related health conditions
and the action of the WTC Program Administrator
concerning each such recommendation.
``(3) Separate clinical programs described.--In paragraph
(2), each of the following shall be treated as a separate
clinical program of the WTC Program:
``(A) Firefighters and related personnel.--The
benefits provided for enrolled WTC responders described
in section 3311(a)(2)(A).
``(B) Other wtc responders.--The benefits provided
for enrolled WTC responders not described in
subparagraph (A).
``(C) WTC survivors.--The benefits provided for
screening-eligible WTC survivors and certified-eligible
WTC survivors in section 3321(a).

``(g) Notification to Congress Upon Reaching 80 Percent of
Eligibility Numerical Limits.--The Secretary shall promptly notify the
Congress of each of the following:
``(1) When the number of enrollments of WTC responders
subject to the limit established under section 3311(a)(4) has
reached 80 percent of such limit.
``(2) When the number of certifications for certified-
eligible WTC survivors subject to the limit established under
section 3321(a)(3) has reached 80 percent of such limit.

``(h) Consultation.--The WTC Program Administrator shall engage in
ongoing outreach and consultation with relevant stakeholders, including
the WTC Health Program Steering Committees and the Advisory Committee
under section 3302, regarding the implementation and improvement of
programs under this title.
``SEC. 3302. <> WTC HEALTH PROGRAM
SCIENTIFIC/TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE;
WTC HEALTH PROGRAM STEERING COMMITTEES.

``(a) Advisory Committee.--
``(1) Establishment.--The WTC Program Administrator shall
establish an advisory committee to be known as the WTC Health
Program Scientific/Technical Advisory Committee (in this
subsection referred to as the `Advisory Committee') to review
scientific and medical evidence and to make recommendations to
the Administrator on additional WTC Program eligibility criteria
and on additional WTC-related health conditions.
``(2) Composition.--The WTC Program Administrator shall
appoint the members of the Advisory Committee and shall include
at least--
``(A) 4 occupational physicians, at least 2 of whom
have experience treating WTC rescue and recovery
workers;
``(B) 1 physician with expertise in pulmonary
medicine;
``(C) 2 environmental medicine or environmental
health specialists;
``(D) 2 representatives of WTC responders;
``(E) 2 representatives of certified-eligible WTC
survivors;
``(F) an industrial hygienist;
``(G) a toxicologist;
``(H) an epidemiologist; and
``(I) a mental health professional.

[[Page 3628]]

``(3) Meetings.--The Advisory Committee shall meet at such
frequency as may be required to carry out its duties.
``(4) Reports.--The <> WTC Program Administrator shall provide for
publication of recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the
public Web site established for the WTC Program.
``(5) Duration.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
the Advisory Committee shall continue in operation during the
period in which the WTC Program is in operation.
``(6) Application of faca.--Except as otherwise specifically
provided, the Advisory Committee shall be subject to the Federal
Advisory Committee Act.

``(b) WTC Health Program Steering Committees.--
``(1) Consultation.--The WTC Program Administrator shall
consult with 2 steering committees (each in this section
referred to as a `Steering Committee') that are established as
follows:
``(A) WTC responders steering committee.--One
Steering Committee, to be known as the WTC Responders
Steering Committee, for the purpose of receiving input
from affected stakeholders and facilitating the
coordination of monitoring and treatment programs for
the enrolled WTC responders under part 1 of subtitle B.
``(B) WTC survivors steering committee.--One
Steering Committee, to be known as the WTC Survivors
Steering Committee, for the purpose of receiving input
from affected stakeholders and facilitating the
coordination of initial health evaluations, monitoring,
and treatment programs for screening-eligible and
certified-eligible WTC survivors under part 2 of
subtitle B.
``(2) Membership.--
``(A) WTC responders steering committee.--
``(i) Representation.--The WTC Responders
Steering Committee shall include--
``(I) representatives of the Centers
of Excellence providing services to WTC
responders;
``(II) representatives of labor
organizations representing firefighters,
police, other New York City employees,
and recovery and cleanup workers who
responded to the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks; and
``(III) 3 representatives of New
York City, 1 of whom will be selected by
the police commissioner of New York
City, 1 by the health commissioner of
New York City, and 1 by the mayor of New
York City.
``(ii) Initial membership.--The WTC Responders
Steering Committee shall initially be composed of
members of the WTC Monitoring and Treatment
Program Steering Committee (as in existence on the
day before the date of the enactment of this
title).
``(B) WTC survivors steering committee.--
``(i) Representation.--The WTC Survivors
Steering Committee shall include representatives
of--
``(I) the Centers of Excellence
providing services to screening-eligible
and certified-eligible WTC survivors;

[[Page 3629]]

``(II) the population of residents,
students, and area and other workers
affected by the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks;
``(III) screening-eligible and
certified-eligible survivors receiving
initial health evaluations, monitoring,
or treatment under part 2 of subtitle B
and organizations advocating on their
behalf; and
``(IV) New York City.
``(ii) Initial membership.--The WTC Survivors
Steering Committee shall initially be composed of
members of the WTC Environmental Health Center
Survivor Advisory Committee (as in existence on
the day before the date of the enactment of this
title).
``(C) Additional appointments.--Each Steering
Committee may recommend, if approved by a majority of
voting members of the Committee, additional members to
the Committee.
``(D) Vacancies.--A vacancy in a Steering Committee
shall be filled by an individual recommended by the
Steering Committee.
``SEC. 3303. <> EDUCATION AND OUTREACH.

``The WTC Program Administrator shall institute a program that
provides education and outreach on the existence and availability of
services under the WTC Program. The outreach and education program--
``(1) shall include--
``(A) <> the establishment of a
public Web site with information about the WTC Program;
``(B) meetings with potentially eligible
populations;
``(C) development and dissemination of outreach
materials informing people about the program; and
``(D) the establishment of phone information
services; and
``(2) shall be conducted in a manner intended--
``(A) to reach all affected populations; and
``(B) to include materials for culturally and
linguistically diverse populations.
``SEC. 3304. <> UNIFORM DATA
COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS.

``(a) In General.--The WTC Program Administrator shall provide for
the uniform collection of data, including claims data (and analysis of
data and regular reports to the Administrator) on the prevalence of WTC-
related health conditions and the identification of new WTC-related
health conditions. Such data shall be collected for all individuals
provided monitoring or treatment benefits under subtitle B and
regardless of their place of residence or Clinical Center of Excellence
through which the benefits are provided. The WTC Program Administrator
shall provide, through the Data Centers or otherwise, for the
integration of such data into the monitoring and treatment program
activities under this title.
``(b) Coordinating Through Centers of Excellence.--Each Clinical
Center of Excellence shall collect data described in subsection (a) and
report such data to the corresponding Data Center for analysis by such
Data Center.
``(c) Collaboration With WTC Health Registry.--The WTC Program
Administrator shall provide for collaboration between the

[[Page 3630]]

Data Centers and the World Trade Center Health Registry described in
section 3342.
``(d) Privacy.--The data collection and analysis under this section
shall be conducted and maintained in a manner that protects the
confidentiality of individually identifiable health information
consistent with applicable statutes and regulations, including, as
applicable, HIPAA privacy and security law (as defined in section
3009(a)(2)) and section 552a of title 5, United States Code.
``SEC. <> 3305. CLINICAL CENTERS OF
EXCELLENCE AND DATA CENTERS.

``(a) In General.--
``(1) Contracts with clinical centers of excellence.--The
WTC Program Administrator shall, subject to subsection
(b)(1)(B), enter into contracts with Clinical Centers of
Excellence (as defined in subsection (b)(1)(A))--
``(A) for the provision of monitoring and treatment
benefits and initial health evaluation benefits under
subtitle B;
``(B) for the provision of outreach activities to
individuals eligible for such monitoring and treatment
benefits, for initial health evaluation benefits, and
for followup to individuals who are enrolled in the
monitoring program;
``(C) for the provision of counseling for benefits
under subtitle B, with respect to WTC-related health
conditions, for individuals eligible for such benefits;
``(D) for the provision of counseling for benefits
for WTC-related health conditions that may be available
under workers' compensation or other benefit programs
for work-related injuries or illnesses, health
insurance, disability insurance, or other insurance
plans or through public or private social service
agencies and assisting eligible individuals in applying
for such benefits;
``(E) for the provision of translational and
interpretive services for program participants who are
not English language proficient; and
``(F) for the collection and reporting of data,
including claims data, in accordance with section 3304.
``(2) Contracts with data centers.--
``(A) In general.--The WTC Program Administrator
shall enter into contracts with one or more Data Centers
(as defined in subsection (b)(2))--
``(i) for receiving, analyzing, and reporting
to the WTC Program Administrator on data, in
accordance with section 3304, that have been
collected and reported to such Data Centers by the
corresponding Clinical Centers of Excellence under
subsection (b)(1)(B)(iii);
``(ii) for the development of monitoring,
initial health evaluation, and treatment
protocols, with respect to WTC-related health
conditions;
``(iii) for coordinating the outreach
activities conducted under paragraph (1)(B) by
each corresponding Clinical Center of Excellence;
``(iv) for establishing criteria for the
credentialing of medical providers participating
in the nationwide network under section 3313;

[[Page 3631]]

``(v) for coordinating and administering the
activities of the WTC Health Program Steering
Committees established under section 3002(b); and
``(vi) for meeting periodically with the
corresponding Clinical Centers of Excellence to
obtain input on the analysis and reporting of data
collected under clause (i) and on the development
of monitoring, initial health evaluation, and
treatment protocols under clause (ii).
``(B) Medical provider selection.--The medical
providers under subparagraph (A)(iv) shall be selected
by the WTC Program Administrator on the basis of their
experience treating or diagnosing the health conditions
included in the list of WTC-related health conditions.
``(C) Clinical discussions.--In carrying out
subparagraph (A)(ii), a Data Center shall engage in
clinical discussions across the WTC Program to guide
treatment approaches for individuals with a WTC-related
health condition.
``(D) Transparency of data.--A contract entered into
under this subsection with a Data Center shall require
the Data Center to make any data collected and reported
to such Center under subsection (b)(1)(B)(iii) available
to health researchers and others as provided in the CDC/
ATSDR Policy on Releasing and Sharing Data.
``(3) Authority for contracts to be class specific.--A
contract entered into under this subsection with a Clinical
Center of Excellence or a Data Center may be with respect to one
or more class of enrolled WTC responders, screening-eligible WTC
survivors, or certified-eligible WTC survivors.
``(4) Use of cooperative agreements.--Any contract under
this title between the WTC Program Administrator and a Data
Center or a Clinical Center of Excellence may be in the form of
a cooperative agreement.
``(5) Review <> on feasibility of
consolidating data centers.--Not later than July 1, 2011, the
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives
and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of
the Senate a report on the feasibility of consolidating Data
Centers into a single Data Center.

``(b) Centers of Excellence.--
``(1) Clinical centers of excellence.--
``(A) Definition.--For purposes of this title, the
term `Clinical Center of Excellence' means a Center that
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator
that the Center--
``(i) uses an integrated, centralized health
care provider approach to create a comprehensive
suite of health services under this title that are
accessible to enrolled WTC responders, screening-
eligible WTC survivors, or certified-eligible WTC
survivors;
``(ii) has experience in caring for WTC
responders and screening-eligible WTC survivors or
includes health care providers who have been
trained pursuant to section 3313(c);

[[Page 3632]]

``(iii) employs health care provider staff
with expertise that includes, at a minimum,
occupational medicine, environmental medicine,
trauma-related psychiatry and psychology, and
social services counseling; and
``(iv) meets such other requirements as
specified by the Administrator.
``(B) Contract requirements.--The WTC Program
Administrator shall not enter into a contract with a
Clinical Center of Excellence under subsection (a)(1)
unless the Center agrees to do each of the following:
``(i) Establish a formal mechanism for
consulting with and receiving input from
representatives of eligible populations receiving
monitoring and treatment benefits under subtitle B
from such Center.
``(ii) Coordinate monitoring and treatment
benefits under subtitle B with routine medical
care provided for the treatment of conditions
other than WTC-related health conditions.
``(iii) Collect and report to the
corresponding Data Center data, including claims
data, in accordance with section 3304(b).
``(iv) Have in place safeguards against fraud
that are satisfactory to the Administrator, in
consultation with the Inspector General of the
Department of Health and Human Services.
``(v) Treat or refer for treatment all
individuals who are enrolled WTC responders or
certified-eligible WTC survivors with respect to
such Center who present themselves for treatment
of a WTC-related health condition.
``(vi) Have in place safeguards, consistent
with section 3304(c), to ensure the
confidentiality of an individual's individually
identifiable health information, including
requiring that such information not be disclosed
to the individual's employer without the
authorization of the individual.
``(vii) Use amounts paid under subsection
(c)(1) only for costs incurred in carrying out the
activities described in subsection (a), other than
those described in subsection (a)(1)(A).
``(viii) Utilize health care providers with
occupational and environmental medicine expertise
to conduct physical and mental health assessments,
in accordance with protocols developed under
subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii).
``(ix) Communicate with WTC responders and
screening-eligible and certified-eligible WTC
survivors in appropriate languages and conduct
outreach activities with relevant stakeholder
worker or community associations.
``(x) Meet all the other applicable
requirements of this title, including regulations
implementing such requirements.
``(C) Transition rule to ensure continuity of
care.--The WTC Program Administrator shall to the
maximum extent feasible ensure continuity of care in any
period of transition from monitoring and treatment of an
enrolled

[[Page 3633]]

WTC responder or certified-eligible WTC survivor by a
provider to a Clinical Center of Excellence or a health
care provider participating in the nationwide network
under section 3313.
``(2) Data centers.--For <> purposes of
this title, the term `Data Center' means a Center that the WTC
Program Administrator determines has the capacity to carry out
the responsibilities for a Data Center under subsection (a)(2).
``(3) Corresponding centers.--For purposes of this title, a
Clinical Center of Excellence and a Data Center shall be treated
as `corresponding' to the extent that such Clinical Center and
Data Center serve the same population group.

``(c) Payment for Infrastructure Costs.--
``(1) In general.--The WTC Program Administrator shall
reimburse a Clinical Center of Excellence for the fixed
infrastructure costs of such Center in carrying out the
activities described in subtitle B at a rate negotiated by the
Administrator and such Centers. Such negotiated rate shall be
fair and appropriate and take into account the number of
enrolled WTC responders receiving services from such Center
under this title.
``(2) Fixed <> infrastructure costs.--For
purposes of paragraph (1), the term `fixed infrastructure costs'
means, with respect to a Clinical Center of Excellence, the
costs incurred by such Center that are not otherwise
reimbursable by the WTC Program Administrator under section
3312(c) for patient evaluation, monitoring, or treatment but
which are needed to operate the WTC program such as the costs
involved in outreach to participants or recruiting participants,
data collection and analysis, social services for counseling
patients on other available assistance outside the WTC program,
and the development of treatment protocols. Such term does not
include costs for new construction or other capital costs.

``(d) GAO Analysis.--Not <> later than July 1,
2011, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate an analysis on
whether Clinical Centers of Excellence with which the WTC Program
Administrator enters into a contract under this section have financial
systems that will allow for the timely submission of claims data for
purposes of section 3304 and subsections (a)(1)(F) and (b)(1)(B)(iii).
``SEC. 3306. <> DEFINITIONS.

``In this title:
``(1) The term `aggravating' means, with respect to a health
condition, a health condition that existed on September 11,
2001, and that, as a result of exposure to airborne toxins, any
other hazard, or any other adverse condition resulting from the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, requires medical
treatment that is (or will be) in addition to, more frequent
than, or of longer duration than the medical treatment that
would have been required for such condition in the absence of
such exposure.
``(2) The term `certified-eligible WTC survivor' has the
meaning given such term in section 3321(a)(2).
``(3) The terms `Clinical Center of Excellence' and `Data
Center' have the meanings given such terms in section 3305.

[[Page 3634]]

``(4) The term `enrolled WTC responder' means a WTC
responder enrolled under section 3311(a)(3).
``(5) The term `initial health evaluation' includes, with
respect to an individual, a medical and exposure history, a
physical examination, and additional medical testing as needed
to evaluate whether the individual has a WTC-related health
condition and is eligible for treatment under the WTC Program.
``(6) The term `list of WTC-related health conditions'
means--
``(A) for WTC responders, the health conditions
listed in section 3312(a)(3); and
``(B) for screening-eligible and certified-eligible
WTC survivors, the health conditions listed in section
3322(b).
``(7) The term `New York City disaster area' means the area
within New York City that is--
``(A) the area of Manhattan that is south of Houston
Street; and
``(B) any block in Brooklyn that is wholly or
partially contained within a 1.5-mile radius of the
former World Trade Center site.
``(8) The term `New York metropolitan area' means an area,
specified by the WTC Program Administrator, within which WTC
responders and eligible WTC screening-eligible survivors who
reside in such area are reasonably able to access monitoring and
treatment benefits and initial health evaluation benefits under
this title through a Clinical Center of Excellence described in
subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C) of section 3305(b)(1).
``(9) The term `screening-eligible WTC survivor' has the
meaning given such term in section 3321(a)(1).
``(10) Any reference to `September 11, 2001' shall be deemed
a reference to the period on such date subsequent to the
terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center, Shanksville,
Pennsylvania, or the Pentagon, as applicable, on such date.
``(11) The term `September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks'
means the terrorist attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001,
in New York City, in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, and at the
Pentagon, and includes the aftermath of such attacks.
``(12) The term `WTC Health Program Steering Committee'
means such a Steering Committee established under section
3302(b).
``(13) The term `WTC Program' means the Word Trade Center
Health Program established under section 3301(a).
``(14)(A) The term `WTC Program Administrator' means--
``(i) subject to subparagraph (B), with respect to
paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 3311(a) (relating to
enrollment of WTC responders), section 3312(c) and the
corresponding provisions of section 3322 (relating to
payment for initial health evaluation, monitoring, and
treatment, paragraphs (1)(C), (2)(B), and (3) of section
3321(a) (relating to determination or certification of
screening-eligible or certified-eligible WTC
responders), and part 3 of subtitle B (relating to payor
provisions), an official in the Department of Health and
Human Services, to be designated by the Secretary; and
``(ii) with respect to any other provision of this
title, the Director of the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, or a designee of such
Director.

[[Page 3635]]

``(B) In no case may the Secretary designate under
subparagraph (A)(i) the Director of the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health or a designee of such Director
with respect to section 3322 (relating to payment for initial
health evaluation, monitoring, and treatment).
``(15) The term `WTC-related health condition' is defined in
section 3312(a).
``(16) The term `WTC responder' is defined in section
3311(a).
``(17) The term `WTC Scientific/Technical Advisory
Committee' means such Committee established under section
3302(a).

``Subtitle B--Program of Monitoring, Initial Health Evaluations, and
Treatment

``PART 1--WTC RESPONDERS

``SEC. <> 3311. IDENTIFICATION OF WTC
RESPONDERS AND PROVISION OF WTC-RELATED
MONITORING SERVICES.

``(a) WTC Responder Defined.--
``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the term `WTC
responder' means any of the following individuals, subject to
paragraph (4):
``(A) Currently identified responder.--An individual
who has been identified as eligible for monitoring under
the arrangements as in effect on the date of the
enactment of this title between the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health and--
``(i) the consortium coordinated by Mt. Sinai
Hospital in New York City that coordinates the
monitoring and treatment for enrolled WTC
responders other than with respect to those
covered under the arrangement with the Fire
Department of New York City; or
``(ii) the Fire Department of New York City.
``(B) Responder who meets current eligibility
criteria.--An individual who meets the current
eligibility criteria described in paragraph (2).
``(C) Responder who meets modified eligibility
criteria.--An individual who--
``(i) performed rescue, recovery, demolition,
debris cleanup, or other related services in the
New York City disaster area in response to the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, regardless
of whether such services were performed by a State
or Federal employee or member of the National
Guard or otherwise; and
``(ii) meets such eligibility criteria
relating to exposure to airborne toxins, other
hazards, or adverse conditions resulting from the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks as the WTC
Program Administrator, after consultation with the
WTC Scientific/Technical Advisory Committee,
determines appropriate.
The WTC Program Administrator shall not modify such
eligibility criteria on or after the date that the
number of enrollments of WTC responders has reached 80
percent of the limit described in paragraph (4) or on or
after the

[[Page 3636]]

date that the number of certifications for certified-
eligible WTC survivors under section 3321(a)(2)(B) has
reached 80 percent of the limit described in section
3321(a)(3).
``(2) Current eligibility <> criteria.--The eligibility criteria described in this
paragraph for an individual is that the individual is described
in any of the following categories:
``(A) Firefighters and related personnel.--The
individual--
``(i) was a member of the Fire Department of
New York City (whether fireor emergency personnel,
active or retired) who participated at least one
day in the rescue and recovery effort at any of
the former World Trade Center sites (including
Ground Zero, Staten Island Landfill, and the New
York City Chief Medical Examiner's Office) for any
time during the period beginning on September 11,
2001, and ending on July 31, 2002; or
``(ii)(I) is a surviving immediate family
member of an individual who was a member of the
Fire Department of New York City (whether fire or
emergency personnel, active or retired) and was
killed at the World Trade site on September 11,
2001; and
``(II) received any treatment for a WTC-
related health condition described in section
3312(a)(1)(A)(ii) (relating to mental health
conditions) on or before September 1, 2008.
``(B) Law enforcement officers and wtc rescue,
recovery, and cleanup workers.--The individual--
``(i) worked or volunteered onsite in rescue,
recovery, debris cleanup, or related support
services in lower Manhattan (south of Canal St.),
the Staten Island Landfill, or the barge loading
piers, for at least 4 hours during the period
beginning on September 11, 2001, and ending on
September 14, 2001, for at least 24 hours during
the period beginning on September 11, 2001, and
ending on September 30, 2001, or for at least 80
hours during the period beginning on September 11,
2001, and ending on July 31, 2002;
``(ii)(I) was a member of the Police
Department of New York City (whether active or
retired) or a member of the Port Authority Police
of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
(whether active or retired) who participated
onsite in rescue, recovery, debris cleanup, or
related services in lower Manhattan (south of
Canal St.), including Ground Zero, the Staten
Island Landfill, or the barge loading piers, for
at least 4 hours during the period beginning
September 11, 2001, and ending on September 14,
2001;
``(II) participated onsite in rescue,
recovery, debris cleanup, or related services at
Ground Zero, the Staten Island Landfill, or the
barge loading piers, for at least one day during
the period beginning on September 11, 2001, and
ending on July 31, 2002;
``(III) participated onsite in rescue,
recovery, debris cleanup, or related services in
lower Manhattan (south of Canal St.) for at least
24 hours during the period

[[Page 3637]]

beginning on September 11, 2001, and ending on
September 30, 2001; or
``(IV) participated onsite in rescue,
recovery, debris cleanup, or related services in
lower Manhattan (south of Canal St.) for at least
80 hours during the period beginning on September
11, 2001, and ending on July 31, 2002;
``(iii) was an employee of the Office of the
Chief Medical Examiner of New York City involved
in the examination and handling of human remains
from the World Trade Center attacks, or other
morgue worker who performed similar post-September
11 functions for such Office staff, during the
period beginning on September 11, 2001, and ending
on July 31, 2002;
``(iv) was a worker in the Port Authority
Trans-Hudson Corporation Tunnel for at least 24
hours during the period beginning on February 1,
2002, and ending on July 1, 2002; or
``(v) was a vehicle-maintenance worker who was
exposed to debris from the former World Trade
Center while retrieving, driving, cleaning,
repairing, and maintaining vehicles contaminated
by airborne toxins from the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks during a duration and period
described in subparagraph (A).
``(C) Responders to the september 11 attacks at the
pentagon and shanksville, pennsylvania.--The
individual--
``(i)(I) was a member of a fire or police
department (whether fire or emergency personnel,
active or retired), worked for a recovery or
cleanup contractor, or was a volunteer; and
performed rescue, recovery, demolition, debris
cleanup, or other related services at the Pentagon
site of the terrorist-related aircraft crash of
September 11, 2001, during the period beginning on
September 11, 2001, and ending on the date on
which the cleanup of the site was concluded, as
determined by the WTC Program Administrator; or
``(II) was a member of a fire or police
department (whether fire or emergency personnel,
active or retired), worked for a recovery or
cleanup contractor, or was a volunteer; and
performed rescue, recovery, demolition, debris
cleanup, or other related services at the
Shanksville, Pennsylvania, site of the terrorist-
related aircraft crash of September 11, 2001,
during the period beginning on September 11, 2001,
and ending on the date on which the cleanup of the
site was concluded, as determined by the WTC
Program Administrator; and
``(ii) is determined by the WTC Program
Administrator to be at an increased risk of
developing a WTC-related health condition as a
result of exposure to airborne toxins, other
hazards, or adverse conditions resulting from the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and meets
such eligibility criteria related to such
exposures, as the WTC Program Administrator
determines are appropriate, after consultation
with the WTC Scientific/Technical Advisory
Committee.

[[Page 3638]]

``(3) Enrollment process.--
``(A) In general.--The WTC Program Administrator
shall establish a process for enrolling WTC responders
in the WTC Program. Under such process--
``(i) WTC responders described in paragraph
(1)(A) shall be deemed to be enrolled in such
Program;
``(ii) subject to clause (iii), the
Administrator shall enroll in such program
individuals who are determined to be WTC
responders;
``(iii) the Administrator shall deny such
enrollment to an individual if the Administrator
determines that the numerical limitation in
paragraph (4) on enrollment of WTC responders has
been met;
``(iv) there shall be no fee charged to the
applicant for making an application for such
enrollment;
``(v) <> the
Administrator shall make a determination on such
an application not later than 60 days after the
date of filing the application; and
``(vi) an individual who is denied enrollment
in such Program shall have an opportunity to
appeal such determination in a manner established
under such process.
``(B) Timing.--
``(i) Currently
identified <> responders.--In
accordance with subparagraph (A)(i), the WTC
Program Administrator shall enroll an individual
described in paragraph (1)(A) in the WTC Program
not later than July 1, 2011.
``(ii) Other responders.--In accordance with
subparagraph (A)(ii) and consistent with paragraph
(4), the WTC Program Administrator shall enroll
any other individual who is determined to be a WTC
responder in the WTC Program at the time of such
determination.
``(4) Numerical limitation on eligible wtc responders.--
``(A) In general.--The total number of individuals
not described in paragraph (1)(A) or (2)(A)(ii) who may
be enrolled under paragraph (3)(A)(ii) shall not exceed
25,000 at any time, of which no more than 2,500 may be
individuals enrolled based on modified eligibility
criteria established under paragraph (1)(C).
``(B) Process.--In implementing subparagraph (A),
the WTC Program Administrator shall--
``(i) limit the number of enrollments made
under paragraph (3)--
``(I) in accordance with such
subparagraph; and
``(II) to such number, as determined
by the Administrator based on the best
available information and subject to
amounts available under section 3351,
that will ensure sufficient funds will
be available to provide treatment and
monitoring benefits under this title,
with respect to all individuals who are
enrolled through the end of fiscal year
2020; and

[[Page 3639]]

``(ii) provide priority (subject to paragraph
(3)(A)(i)) in such enrollments in the order in
which individuals apply for enrollment under
paragraph (3).
``(5) Disqualification of individuals on terrorist watch
list.--No individual who is on the terrorist watch list
maintained by the Department of Homeland Security shall qualify
as an eligible WTC responder. <> Before
enrolling any individual as a WTC responder in the WTC Program
under paragraph (3), the Administrator, in consultation with the
Secretary of Homeland Security, shall determine whether the
individual is on such list.

``(b) Monitoring Benefits.--
``(1) In general.--In the case of an enrolled WTC responder
(other than one described in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii)), the WTC
Program shall provide for monitoring benefits that include
monitoring consistent with protocols approved by the WTC Program
Administrator and including clinical examinations and long-term
health monitoring and analysis. In the case of an enrolled WTC
responder who is an active member of the Fire Department of New
York City, the responder shall receive such benefits as part of
the individual's periodic company medical exams.
``(2) Provision of monitoring benefits.--The monitoring
benefits under paragraph (1) shall be provided through the
Clinical Center of Excellence for the type of individual
involved or, in the case of an individual residing outside the
New York metropolitan area, under an arrangement under section
3313.
``SEC. 3312. <> TREATMENT OF ENROLLED WTC
RESPONDERS FOR WTC-RELATED HEALTH
CONDITIONS.

``(a) WTC-Related Health Condition Defined.--
``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the term
`WTC-related health condition' means a condition that--
``(A)(i) is an illness or health condition for which
exposure to airborne toxins, any other hazard, or any
other adverse condition resulting from the September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks, based on an examination by a
medical professional with experience in treating or
diagnosing the health conditions included in the
applicable list of WTC-related health conditions, is
substantially likely to be a significant factor in
aggravating, contributing to, or causing the illness or
health condition, as determined under paragraph (2); or
``(ii) is a mental health condition for which such
attacks, based on an examination by a medical
professional with experience in treating or diagnosing
the health conditions included in the applicable list of
WTC-related health conditions, is substantially likely
to be a significant factor in aggravating, contributing
to, or causing the condition, as determined under
paragraph (2); and
``(B) is included in the applicable list of WTC-
related health conditions or--
``(i) with respect to a WTC responder, is
provided certification of coverage under
subsection (b)(2)(B)(iii); or
``(ii) with respect to a screening-eligible
WTC survivor or certified-eligible WTC survivor,
is provided

[[Page 3640]]

certification of coverage under subsection
(b)(2)(B)(iii), as applied under section 3322(a).
In the case of a WTC responder described in section
3311(a)(2)(A)(ii) (relating to a surviving immediate family
member of a firefighter), such term does not include an illness
or health condition described in subparagraph (A)(i).
``(2) Determination.--The determination under paragraph (1)
or subsection (b) of whether the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks were substantially likely to be a significant factor in
aggravating, contributing to, or causing an individual's illness
or health condition shall be made based on an assessment of the
following:
``(A) The individual's exposure to airborne toxins,
any other hazard, or any other adverse condition
resulting from the terrorist attacks. Such exposure
shall be--
``(i) evaluated and characterized through the
use of a standardized, population-appropriate
questionnaire approved by the Director of the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health; and
``(ii) assessed and documented by a medical
professional with experience in treating or
diagnosing health conditions included on the list
of WTC-related health conditions.
``(B) The type of symptoms and temporal sequence of
symptoms. Such symptoms shall be--
``(i) assessed through the use of a
standardized, population-appropriate medical
questionnaire approved by the Director of the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health and a medical examination; and
``(ii) diagnosed and documented by a medical
professional described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
``(3) List of health conditions for wtc responders.--The
list of health conditions for WTC responders consists of the
following:
``(A) Aerodigestive disorders.--
``(i) Interstitial lung diseases.
``(ii) Chronic respiratory disorder--fumes/
vapors.
``(iii) Asthma.
``(iv) Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
(RADS).
``(v) WTC-exacerbated chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
``(vi) Chronic cough syndrome.
``(vii) Upper airway hyperreactivity.
``(viii) Chronic rhinosinusitis.
``(ix) Chronic nasopharyngitis.
``(x) Chronic laryngitis.
``(xi) Gastroesophageal reflux disorder
(GERD).
``(xii) Sleep apnea exacerbated by or related
to a condition described in a previous clause.
``(B) Mental health conditions.--
``(i) Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
``(ii) Major depressive disorder.
``(iii) Panic disorder.
``(iv) Generalized anxiety disorder.
``(v) Anxiety disorder (not otherwise
specified).

[[Page 3641]]

``(vi) Depression (not otherwise specified).
``(vii) Acute stress disorder.
``(viii) Dysthymic disorder.
``(ix) Adjustment disorder.
``(x) Substance abuse.
``(C) Musculoskeletal disorders for certain wtc
responders.--In the case of a WTC responder described in
paragraph (4), a condition described in such paragraph.
``(D) Additional conditions.--Any cancer (or type of
cancer) or other condition added, pursuant to paragraph
(5) or (6), to the list under this paragraph.
``(4) Musculoskeletal disorders.--
``(A) In general.--For purposes of this title, in
the case of a WTC responder who received any treatment
for a WTC-related musculoskeletal disorder on or before
September 11, 2003, the list of health conditions in
paragraph (3) shall include:
``(i) Low back pain.
``(ii) Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS).
``(iii) Other musculoskeletal disorders.
``(B) Definition.--The term `WTC-related
musculoskeletal disorder' means a chronic or recurrent
disorder of the musculoskeletal system caused by heavy
lifting or repetitive strain on the joints or
musculoskeletal system occurring during rescue or
recovery efforts in the New York City disaster area in
the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks.
``(5) Cancer.--
``(A) In general.--
The <> WTC Program
Administrator shall periodically conduct a review of all
available scientific and medical evidence, including
findings and recommendations of Clinical Centers of
Excellence, published in peer-reviewed journals to
determine if, based on such evidence, cancer or a
certain type of cancer should be added to the applicable
list of WTC-related health conditions. The WTC Program
Administrator shall conduct the first review under this
subparagraph not later than 180 days after the date of
the enactment of this title.
``(B) Proposed regulations and rulemaking.--Based on
the periodic reviews under subparagraph (A), if the WTC
Program Administrator determines that cancer or a
certain type of cancer should be added to such list of
WTC-related health conditions, the WTC Program
Administrator shall propose regulations, through
rulemaking, to add cancer or the certain type of cancer
to such list.
``(C) Final regulations.--
Based <> on all the available
evidence in the rulemaking record, the WTC Program
Administrator shall make a final determination of
whether cancer or a certain type of cancer should be
added to such list of WTC-related health conditions. If
such a determination is made to make such an addition,
the WTC Program Administrator shall by regulation add
cancer or the certain type of cancer to such list.
``(D) Determinations not to add cancer or certain
types of cancer.--In <> the case that the WTC Program
Administrator determines under subparagraph (B) or (C)
that cancer or a certain type of cancer should not be
added

[[Page 3642]]

to such list of WTC-related health conditions, the WTC
Program Administrator shall publish an explanation for
such determination in the Federal Register. Any such
determination to not make such an addition shall not
preclude the addition of cancer or the certain type of
cancer to such list at a later date.
``(6) Addition of health conditions to list for wtc
responders.--
``(A) In general.--Whenever the WTC Program
Administrator determines that a proposed rule should be
promulgated to add a health condition to the list of
health conditions in paragraph (3), the Administrator
may request a recommendation of the Advisory Committee
or may publish such a proposed rule in the Federal
Register in accordance with subparagraph (D).
``(B) Administrator's options after receipt of
petition.--In the <> case that the WTC
Program Administrator receives a written petition by an
interested party to add a health condition to the list
of health conditions in paragraph (3), not later than 60
days after the date of receipt of such petition the
Administrator shall--
``(i) request a recommendation of the Advisory
Committee;
``(ii) publish a proposed rule in the Federal
Register to add such health condition, in
accordance with subparagraph (D);
``(iii) publish in the Federal Register the
Administrator's determination not to publish such
a proposed rule and the basis for such
determination; or
``(iv) publish in the Federal Register a
determination that insufficient evidence exists to
take action under clauses (i) through (iii).
``(C) Action by advisory committee.--
In <> the case that
the Administrator requests a recommendation of the
Advisory Committee under this paragraph, with respect to
adding a health condition to the list in paragraph (3),
the Advisory Committee shall submit to the Administrator
such recommendation not later than 60 days after the
date of such request or by such date (not to exceed 180
days after such date of request) as specified by the
Administrator. Not later than <> 60 days after the date of receipt of such
recommendation, the Administrator shall, in accordance
with subparagraph (D), publish in the Federal Register a
proposed rule with respect to such recommendation or a
determination not to propose such a proposed rule and
the basis for such determination.
``(D) Publication.--The WTC Program Administrator
shall, with respect to any proposed rule under this
paragraph--
``(i) publish such proposed rule in accordance
with section 553 of title 5, United States Code;
and
``(ii) <> provide
interested parties a period of 30 days after such
publication to submit written comments on the
proposed rule.
The WTC Program Administrator may <> extend the period described in
clause (ii) upon a finding of good cause. In

[[Page 3643]]

the case of such an extension, the Administrator shall
publish such extension in the Federal Register.
``(E) Interested <> party
defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term
`interested party' includes a representative of any
organization representing WTC responders, a nationally
recognized medical association, a Clinical or Data
Center, a State or political subdivision, or any other
interested person.

``(b) Coverage of Treatment for WTC-Related Health Conditions.--
``(1) Determination for enrolled wtc responders based on a
wtc-related health condition.--
``(A) In general.--If a physician at a Clinical
Center of Excellence that is providing monitoring
benefits under section 3311 for an enrolled WTC
responder makes a determination that the responder has a
WTC-related health condition that is in the list in
subsection (a)(3) and that exposure to airborne toxins,
other hazards, or adverse conditions resulting from the
September 1, 2001, terrorist attacks is substantially
likely to be a significant factor in aggravating,
contributing to, or causing the condition--
``(i) the physician shall promptly transmit
such determination to the WTC Program
Administrator and provide the Administrator with
the medical facts supporting such determination;
and
``(ii) on and after the date of such
transmittal and subject to subparagraph (B), the
WTC Program shall provide for payment under
subsection (c) for medically necessary treatment
for such condition.
``(B) Review; certification; appeals.--
``(i) Review.--A Federal employee designated
by the WTC Program Administrator shall review
determinations made under subparagraph (A).
``(ii) Certification.--The Administrator shall
provide a certification of such condition based
upon reviews conducted under clause (i). Such a
certification shall be provided unless the
Administrator determines that the responder's
condition is not a WTC-related health condition in
the list in subsection (a)(3) or that exposure to
airborne toxins, other hazards, or adverse
conditions resulting from the September 1, 2001,
terrorist attacks is not substantially likely to
be a significant factor in aggravating,
contributing to, or causing the condition.
``(iii) Appeal process.--
The <> Administrator shall
establish, by rule, a process for the appeal of
determinations under clause (ii).
``(2) Determination based on medically associated wtc-
related health conditions.--
``(A) In general.--If a physician at a Clinical
Center of Excellence determines pursuant to subsection
(a) that the enrolled WTC responder has a health
condition described in subsection (a)(1)(A) that is not
in the list in subsection (a)(3) but which is medically
associated with a WTC-related health condition--
``(i) the physician shall promptly transmit
such determination to the WTC Program
Administrator and

[[Page 3644]]

provide the Administrator with the facts
supporting such determination; and
``(ii) the Administrator shall make a
determination under subparagraph (B) with respect
to such physician's determination.
``(B) Procedures <> for review,
certification, and appeal.--The WTC Program
Administrator shall, by rule, establish procedures for
the review and certification of physician determinations
under subparagraph (A). Such rule shall provide for--
``(i) the timely review of such a
determination by a physician panel with
appropriate expertise for the condition and
recommendations to the WTC Program Administrator;
``(ii) <> not later than 60
days after the date of the transmittal under
subparagraph (A)(i), a determination by the WTC
Program Administrator on whether or not the
condition involved is described in subsection
(a)(1)(A) and is medically associated with a WTC-
related health condition;
``(iii) certification in accordance with
paragraph (1)(B)(ii) of coverage of such condition
if determined to be described in subsection
(a)(1)(A) and medically associated with a WTC-
related health condition; and
``(iv) a process for appeals of determinations
relating to such conditions.
``(C) Inclusion in list of health conditions.--If
the WTC Program Administrator provides certification
under subparagraph (B)(iii) for coverage of a condition,
the Administrator may, pursuant to subsection (a)(6),
add the condition to the list in subsection (a)(3).
``(D) Conditions already declined for inclusion in
list.--If the WTC Program Administrator publishes a
determination under subsection (a)(6)(B) not to include
a condition in the list in subsection (a)(3), the WTC
Program Administrator shall not provide certification
under subparagraph (B)(iii) for coverage of the
condition. In the case of an individual who is certified
under subparagraph (B)(iii) with respect to such
condition before the date of the publication of such
determination the previous sentence shall not apply.
``(3) Requirement of medical necessity.--
``(A) In general.--In providing treatment for a WTC-
related health condition, a physician or other provider
shall provide treatment that is medically necessary and
in accordance with medical treatment protocols
established under subsection (d).
``(B) Regulations relating to medical necessity.--
For the purpose of this title, the WTC Program
Administrator shall issue regulations specifying a
standard for determining medical necessity with respect
to health care services and prescription
pharmaceuticals, a process for determining whether
treatment furnished and pharmaceuticals prescribed under
this title meet such standard (including any prior
authorization requirement), and a process for appeal of
a determination under subsection (c)(3).

[[Page 3645]]

``(4) Scope of treatment covered.--
``(A) In general.--The scope of treatment covered
under this subsection includes services of physicians
and other health care providers, diagnostic and
laboratory tests, prescription drugs, inpatient and
outpatient hospital services, and other medically
necessary treatment.
``(B) Pharmaceutical coverage.--With respect to
ensuring coverage of medically necessary outpatient
prescription drugs, such drugs shall be provided, under
arrangements made by the WTC Program Administrator,
directly through participating Clinical Centers of
Excellence or through one or more outside vendors.
``(C) Transportation expenses for nationwide
network.--The WTC Program Administrator may provide for
necessary and reasonable transportation and expenses
incident to the securing of medically necessary
treatment through the nationwide network under section
3313 involving travel of more than 250 miles and for
which payment is made under this section in the same
manner in which individuals may be furnished necessary
and reasonable transportation and expenses incident to
services involving travel of more than 250 miles under
regulations implementing section 3629(c) of the Energy
Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act
of 2000 (title XXXVI of Public Law 106-398; 42 U.S.C.
7384t(c)).
``(5) Provision of treatment pending certification.--With
respect to an enrolled WTC responder for whom a determination is
made by an examining physician under paragraph (1) or (2), but
for whom the WTC Program Administrator has not yet determined
whether to certify the determination, the WTC Program
Administrator may establish by rule a process through which the
Administrator may approve the provision of medical treatment
under this subsection (and payment under subsection (c)) with
respect to such responder and such responder's WTC-related
health condition (under such terms and conditions as the
Administrator may provide) until the Administrator makes a
decision on whether to certify the determination.

``(c) Payment for Initial Health Evaluation, Monitoring, and
Treatment of WTC-Related Health Conditions.--
``(1) Medical treatment.--
``(A) Use of feca payment rates.--
``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii):
``(I) Subject to subparagraphs (B)
and (C), the WTC Program Administrator
shall reimburse costs for medically
necessary treatment under this title for
WTC-related health conditions according
to the payment rates that would apply to
the provision of such treatment and
services by the facility under the
Federal Employees Compensation Act.
``(II) <> For
treatment not covered under subclause
(i) or subparagraph (B), the WTC Program
Administrator shall establish by
regulation a reimbursement rate for such
treatment.
``(ii) Exception.--In no case shall payments
for products or services under clause (i) be made
at a rate higher than the Office of Worker's
Compensation

[[Page 3646]]

Programs in the Department Labor would pay for
such products or services rendered at the time
such products or services were provided.
``(B) Pharmaceuticals.--
``(i) In general.--The WTC Program
Administrator shall establish a program for paying
for the medically necessary outpatient
prescription pharmaceuticals prescribed under this
title for WTC-related health conditions through
one or more contracts with outside vendors.
``(ii) Competitive bidding.--Under such
program the Administrator shall--
``(I) select one or more appropriate
vendors through a Federal competitive
bid process; and
``(II) select the lowest bidder (or
bidders) meeting the requirements for
providing pharmaceutical benefits for
participants in the WTC Program.
``(iii) Treatment of fdny participants.--Under
such program the Administrator may enter into an
agreement with a separate vendor to provide
pharmaceutical benefits to enrolled WTC responders
for whom the Clinical Center of Excellence is
described in section 3305 if such an arrangement
is deemed necessary and beneficial to the program
by the WTC Program Administrator.
``(iv) Pharmaceuticals.--
Not <> later than July
1, 2011, the Comptroller General of the United
States shall submit to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce of the House of Representatives and the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions of the Senate a report on whether
existing Federal pharmaceutical purchasing
programs can provide pharmaceutical benefits more
efficiently and effectively than through the WTC
program.
``(C) Improving quality and efficiency through
modification of payment amounts and methodologies.--The
WTC Program Administrator may modify the amounts and
methodologies for making payments for initial health
evaluations, monitoring, or treatment, if, taking into
account utilization and quality data furnished by the
Clinical Centers of Excellence under section
3305(b)(1)(B)(iii), the Administrator determines that a
bundling, capitation, pay for performance, or other
payment methodology would better ensure high quality and
efficient delivery of initial health evaluations,
monitoring, or treatment to an enrolled WTC responder,
screening-eligible WTC survivor, or certified-eligible
WTC survivor.
``(2) Monitoring and initial health evaluation.--The WTC
Program Administrator shall reimburse the costs of monitoring
and the costs of an initial health evaluation provided under
this title at a rate set by the Administrator by regulation.
``(3) Determination of medical necessity.--
``(A) Review of medical necessity and protocols.--As
part of the process for reimbursement or payment under
this subsection, the WTC Program Administrator shall
provide for the review of claims for reimbursement or
payment

[[Page 3647]]

for the provision of medical treatment to determine if
such treatment is medically necessary and in accordance
with medical treatment protocols established under
subsection (d).
``(B) Withholding of payment for medically
unnecessary treatment.--The Administrator shall withhold
such reimbursement or payment for treatment that the
Administrator determines is not medically necessary or
is not in accordance with such medical treatment
protocols.

``(d) Medical Treatment Protocols.--
``(1) Development.--The Data Centers shall develop medical
treatment protocols for the treatment of enrolled WTC responders
and certified-eligible WTC survivors for health conditions
included in the applicable list of WTC-related health
conditions.
``(2) Approval.--The medical treatment protocols developed
under paragraph (1) shall be subject to approval by the WTC
Program Administrator.
``SEC. 3313. <> NATIONAL ARRANGEMENT FOR
BENEFITS FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS
OUTSIDE NEW YORK.

``(a) In General.--In order to ensure reasonable access to benefits
under this subtitle for individuals who are enrolled WTC responders,
screening-eligible WTC survivors, or certified-eligible WTC survivors
and who reside in any State, as defined in section 2(f), outside the New
York metropolitan area, the WTC Program Administrator shall establish a
nationwide network of health care providers to provide monitoring and
treatment benefits and initial health evaluations near such individuals'
areas of residence in such States. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as preventing such individuals from being provided such
monitoring and treatment benefits or initial health evaluation through
any Clinical Center of Excellence.
``(b) Network Requirements.--Any health care provider participating
in the network under subsection (a) shall--
``(1) meet criteria for credentialing established by the
Data Centers;
``(2) follow the monitoring, initial health evaluation, and
treatment protocols developed under section 3305(a)(2)(A)(ii);
``(3) collect and report data in accordance with section
3304; and
``(4) meet such fraud, quality assurance, and other
requirements as the WTC Program Administrator establishes,
including sections 1128 through 1128E of the Social Security
Act, as applied by section 3301(d).

``(c) Training and Technical Assistance.--The WTC Program Administer
may provide, including through contract, for the provision of training
and technical assistance to health care providers participating in the
network under subsection (a).
``(d) Provision of Services Through the VA.--
``(1) In general.--The WTC Program Administrator may enter
into an agreement with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the
Secretary to provide services under this section through
facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
``(2) National program.--
Not <> later than July 1, 2011, the
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit

[[Page 3648]]

to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions of the Senate a report on whether the Department of
Veterans Affairs can provide monitoring and treatment services
to individuals under this section more efficiently and
effectively than through the nationwide network to be
established under subsection (a).

``PART 2--WTC SURVIVORS

``SEC. 3321. <> IDENTIFICATION AND INITIAL
HEALTH EVALUATION OF SCREENING-ELIGIBLE
AND CERTIFIED-ELIGIBLE WTC SURVIVORS.

``(a) Identification of Screening-Eligible WTC Survivors and
Certified-Eligible WTC Survivors.--
``(1) Screening-eligible wtc survivors.--
``(A) Definition.--In this title, the term
`screening-eligible WTC survivor' means, subject to
subparagraph (C) and paragraph (3), an individual who is
described in any of the following clauses:
``(i) Currently identified survivor.--An
individual, including a WTC responder, who has
been identified as eligible for medical treatment
and monitoring by the WTC Environmental Health
Center as of the date of enactment of this title.
``(ii) Survivor who meets current eligibility
criteria.--An individual who is not a WTC
responder, for purposes of the initial health
evaluation under subsection (b), claims symptoms
of a WTC-related health condition and meets any of
the current eligibility criteria described in
subparagraph (B).
``(iii) Survivor who meets modified
eligibility criteria.--An individual who is not a
WTC responder, for purposes of the initial health
evaluation under subsection (b), claims symptoms
of a WTC-related health condition and meets such
eligibility criteria relating to exposure to
airborne toxins, other hazards, or adverse
conditions resulting from the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks as the WTC Administrator
determines, after consultation with the Data
Centers described in section 3305 and the WTC
Scientific/Technical Advisory Committee and WTC
Health Program Steering Committees under section
3302.
The Administrator shall not modify such criteria under
clause (iii) on or after the date that the number of
certifications for certified-eligible WTC survivors
under paragraph (2)(B) has reached 80 percent of the
limit described in paragraph (3) or on or after the date
that the number of enrollments of WTC responders has
reached 80 percent of the limit described in section
3311(a)(4).
``(B) Current <> eligibility
criteria.--The eligibility criteria described in this
subparagraph for an individual are that the individual
is described in any of the following clauses:
``(i) A person who was present in the New York
City disaster area in the dust or dust cloud on
September 11, 2001.

[[Page 3649]]

``(ii) A person who worked, resided, or
attended school, childcare, or adult daycare in
the New York City disaster area for--
``(I) at least 4 days during the 4-
month period beginning on September 11,
2001, and ending on January 10, 2002; or
``(II) at least 30 days during the
period beginning on September 11, 2001,
and ending on July 31, 2002.
``(iii) Any person who worked as a cleanup
worker or performed maintenance work in the New
York City disaster area during the 4-month period
described in subparagraph (B)(i) and had extensive
exposure to WTC dust as a result of such work.
``(iv) A person who was deemed eligible to
receive a grant from the Lower Manhattan
Development Corporation Residential Grant Program,
who possessed a lease for a residence or purchased
a residence in the New York City disaster area,
and who resided in such residence during the
period beginning on September 11, 2001, and ending
on May 31, 2003.
``(v) A person whose place of employment--
``(I) at any time during the period
beginning on September 11, 2001, and
ending on May 31, 2003, was in the New
York City disaster area; and
``(II) was deemed eligible to
receive a grant from the Lower Manhattan
Development Corporation WTC Small Firms
Attraction and Retention Act program or
other government incentive program
designed to revitalize the lower
Manhattan economy after the September
11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
``(C) Application and determination process for
screening eligibility.--
``(i) In general.--The WTC Program
Administrator in consultation with the Data
Centers shall establish a process for individuals,
other than individuals described in subparagraph
(A)(i), to be determined to be screening-eligible
WTC survivors. Under such process--
``(I) there shall be no fee charged
to the applicant for making an
application for such determination;
``(II) <> the
Administrator shall make a determination
on such an application not later than 60
days after the date of filing the
application;
``(III) the Administrator shall make
such a determination relating to an
applicant's compliance with this title
and shall not determine that an
individual is not so eligible or deny
written documentation under clause (ii)
to such individual unless the
Administrator determines that--
``(aa) based on the
application submitted, the
individual does not meet the
eligibility criteria; or

[[Page 3650]]

``(bb) the numerical
limitation on certifications of
certified-eligible WTC survivors
set forth in paragraph (3) has
been met; and
``(IV) an individual who is
determined not to be a screening-
eligible WTC survivor shall have an
opportunity to appeal such determination
in a manner established under such
process.
``(ii) Written documentation of screening-
eligibility.--
``(I) In general.--In the case of an
individual who is described in
subparagraph (A)(i) or who is determined
under clause (i) (consistent with
paragraph (3)) to be a screening-
eligible WTC survivor, the WTC Program
Administrator shall provide an
appropriate written documentation of
such fact.
``(II) Timing.--
``(aa) Currently identified
survivors.--In the case of an
individual who is described in
subparagraph (A)(i), the WTC
Program Administrator shall
provide the written
documentation under subclause
(I) not later than July 1, 2011.
``(bb) Other members.--In
the case of another individual
who is determined under clause
(i) and consistent with
paragraph (3) to be a screening-
eligible WTC survivor, the WTC
Program Administrator shall
provide the written
documentation under subclause
(I) at the time of such
determination.
``(2) Certified-eligible wtc survivors.--
``(A) Definition.--The term `certified-eligible WTC
survivor' means, subject to paragraph (3), a screening-
eligible WTC survivor who the WTC Program Administrator
certifies under subparagraph (B) to be eligible for
followup monitoring and treatment under this part.
``(B) Certification of eligibility for monitoring
and treatment.--
``(i) In general.--The WTC Program
Administrator shall establish a certification
process under which the Administrator shall
provide appropriate certification to screening-
eligible WTC survivors who, pursuant to the
initial health evaluation under subsection (b),
are determined to be eligible for followup
monitoring and treatment under this part.
``(ii) Timing.--
``(I) Currently identified
survivors.--In the case of an individual
who is described in paragraph (1)(A)(i),
the WTC Program Administrator shall
provide the certification under clause
(i) not later than July 1, 2011.
``(II) Other members.--In the case
of another individual who is determined
under clause (i) to be eligible for
followup monitoring and treatment, the
WTC Program Administrator shall provide
the certification under such clause at
the time of such determination.

[[Page 3651]]

``(3) Numerical limitation on certified-eligible wtc
survivors.--
``(A) In general.--The total number of individuals
not described in paragraph (1)(A)(i) who may be
certified as certified-eligible WTC survivors under
paragraph (2)(B) shall not exceed 25,000 at any time.
``(B) Process.--In implementing subparagraph (A),
the WTC Program Administrator shall--
``(i) limit the number of certifications
provided under paragraph (2)(B)--
``(I) in accordance with such
subparagraph; and
``(II) to such number, as determined
by the Administrator based on the best
available information and subject to
amounts made available under section
3351, that will ensure sufficient funds
will be available to provide treatment
and monitoring benefits under this
title, with respect to all individuals
receiving such certifications through
the end of fiscal year 2020; and
``(ii) provide priority in such certifications
in the order in which individuals apply for a
determination under paragraph (2)(B).
``(4) Disqualification of individuals on terrorist watch
list.--No individual who is on the terrorist watch list
maintained by the Department of Homeland Security shall qualify
as a screening-eligible WTC survivor or a certified-eligible WTC
survivor. <> Before determining any
individual to be a screening-eligible WTC survivor under
paragraph (1) or certifying any individual as a certified
eligible WTC survivor under paragraph (2), the Administrator, in
consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall
determine whether the individual is on such list.

``(b) Initial Health Evaluation To Determine Eligibility for
Followup Monitoring or Treatment.--
``(1) In general.--In the case of a screening-eligible WTC
survivor, the WTC Program shall provide for an initial health
evaluation to determine if the survivor has a WTC-related health
condition and is eligible for followup monitoring and treatment
benefits under the WTC Program. Initial health evaluation
protocols under section 3305(a)(2)(A)(ii) shall be subject to
approval by the WTC Program Administrator.
``(2) Initial health evaluation providers.--The initial
health evaluation described in paragraph (1) shall be provided
through a Clinical Center of Excellence with respect to the
individual involved.
``(3) Limitation on initial health evaluation benefits.--
Benefits for an initial health evaluation under this part for a
screening-eligible WTC survivor shall consist only of a single
medical initial health evaluation consistent with initial health
evaluation protocols described in paragraph (1). Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed as preventing such an individual
from seeking additional medical initial health evaluations at
the expense of the individual.

[[Page 3652]]

``SEC. 3322. <> FOLLOWUP MONITORING AND
TREATMENT OF CERTIFIED-ELIGIBLE WTC
SURVIVORS FOR WTC-RELATED HEALTH
CONDITIONS.

``(a) In General.--Subject <> to subsection
(b), the provisions of sections 3311 and 3312 shall apply to followup
monitoring and treatment of WTC-related health conditions for certified-
eligible WTC survivors in the same manner as such provisions apply to
the monitoring and treatment of WTC-related health conditions for
enrolled WTC responders.

``(b) List of WTC-Related Health Conditions for Survivors.--The list
of health conditions for screening-eligible WTC survivors and certified-
eligible WTC survivors consists of the following:
``(1) Aerodigestive disorders.--
``(A) Interstitial lung diseases.
``(B) Chronic respiratory disorder--fumes/vapors.
``(C) Asthma.
``(D) Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS).
``(E) WTC-exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
``(F) Chronic cough syndrome.
``(G) Upper airway hyperreactivity.
``(H) Chronic rhinosinusitis.
``(I) Chronic nasopharyngitis.
``(J) Chronic laryngitis.
``(K) Gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD).
``(L) Sleep apnea exacerbated by or related to a
condition described in a previous clause.
``(2) Mental health conditions.--
``(A) Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
``(B) Major depressive disorder.
``(C) Panic disorder.
``(D) Generalized anxiety disorder.
``(E) Anxiety disorder (not otherwise specified).
``(F) Depression (not otherwise specified).
``(G) Acute stress disorder.
``(H) Dysthymic disorder.
``(I) Adjustment disorder.
``(J) Substance abuse.
``(3) Additional conditions.--Any cancer (or type of cancer)
or other condition added to the list in section 3312(a)(3)
pursuant to paragraph (5) or (6) of section 3312(a), as such
provisions are applied under subsection (a) with respect to
certified-eligible WTC survivors.
``SEC. 3323. <> FOLLOWUP MONITORING AND
TREATMENT OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS WITH WTC-
RELATED HEALTH CONDITIONS.

``(a) In General.--Subject <> to subsection
(c), the provisions of section 3322 shall apply to the followup
monitoring and treatment of WTC-related health conditions in the case of
individuals described in subsection (b) in the same manner as such
provisions apply to the followup monitoring and treatment of WTC-related
health conditions for certified-eligible WTC survivors.

``(b) Individuals Described.--An individual described in this
subsection is an individual who, regardless of location of residence--
``(1) is not an enrolled WTC responder or a certified-
eligible WTC survivor; and

[[Page 3653]]

``(2) is diagnosed at a Clinical Center of Excellence with a
WTC-related health condition for certified-eligible WTC
survivors.

``(c) Limitation.--
``(1) In general.--The WTC Program Administrator shall limit
benefits for any fiscal year under subsection (a) in a manner so
that payments under this section for such fiscal year do not
exceed the amount specified in paragraph (2) for such fiscal
year.
``(2) Limitation.--The amount specified in this paragraph
for--
``(A) the last calendar quarter of fiscal year 2011
is $5,000,000;
``(B) fiscal year 2012 is $20,000,000; or
``(C) a succeeding fiscal year is the amount
specified in this paragraph for the previous fiscal year
increased by the annual percentage increase in the
medical care component of the consumer price index for
all urban consumers.

``PART 3--PAYOR PROVISIONS

``SEC. 3331. <> PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.

``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c),
the cost of monitoring and treatment benefits and initial health
evaluation benefits provided under parts 1 and 2 of this subtitle shall
be paid for by the WTC Program from the World Trade Center Health
Program Fund.
``(b) Workers' Compensation Payment.--
``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), payment for
treatment under parts 1 and 2 of this subtitle of a WTC-related
health condition of an individual that is work-related shall be
reduced or recouped to the extent that the WTC Program
Administrator determines that payment has been made, or can
reasonably be expected to be made, under a workers' compensation
law or plan of the United States, a State, or a locality, or
other work-related injury or illness benefit plan of the
employer of such individual, for such
treatment. <> The provisions of clauses
(iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of paragraph (2)(B) of section
1862(b) of the Social Security Act and paragraphs (3) and (4) of
such section shall apply to the recoupment under this subsection
of a payment to the WTC Program (with respect to a workers'
compensation law or plan, or other work-related injury or
illness plan of the employer involved, and such individual) in
the same manner as such provisions apply to the reimbursement of
a payment under section 1862(b)(2) of such Act to the Secretary
(with respect to such a law or plan and an individual entitled
to benefits under title XVIII of such Act) except that any
reference in such paragraph (4) to payment rates under title
XVIII of the Social Security Act shall be deemed a reference to
payment rates under this title.
``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply for any
quarter, with respect to any workers' compensation law or plan,
including line of duty compensation, to which New York City is
obligated to make payments, if, in accordance with terms
specified under the contract under subsection (d)(1)(A),

[[Page 3654]]

New York City has made the full payment required under such
contract for such quarter.
``(3) Rules of construction.--Nothing in this title shall be
construed to affect, modify, or relieve any obligations under a
worker's compensation law or plan, other work-related injury or
illness benefit plan of an employer, or any health insurance
plan.

``(c) Health Insurance Coverage.--
``(1) In general.--In <> the case of
an individual who has a WTC-related health condition that is not
work-related and has health coverage for such condition through
any public or private health plan (including health benefits
under title XVIII, XIX, or XXI of the Social Security Act) the
provisions of section 1862(b) of the Social Security Act shall
apply to such a health plan and such individual in the same
manner as they apply to group health plan and an individual
entitled to benefits under title XVIII of such Act pursuant to
section 226(a) of such Act. Any costs for items and services
covered under such plan that are not reimbursed by such health
plan, due to the application of deductibles, copayments,
coinsurance, other cost sharing, or otherwise, are reimbursable
under this title to the extent that they are covered under the
WTC Program. The program under this title shall not be treated
as a legally liable party for purposes of applying section
1902(a)(25) of the Social Security Act.
``(2) Recovery by individual providers.--Nothing in
paragraph (1) shall be construed as requiring an entity
providing monitoring and treatment under this title to seek
reimbursement under a health plan with which the entity has no
contract for reimbursement.
``(3) Maintenance of required minimum essential coverage.--
No payment may be made for monitoring and treatment under this
title for an individual for a month (beginning with July 2014)
if with respect to such month the individual--
``(A) is an applicable individual (as defined in
subsection (d) of section 5000A of Internal Revenue Code
of 1986) for whom the exemption under subsection (e) of
such section does not apply; and
``(B) is not covered under minimum essential
coverage, as required under subsection (a) of such
section.

``(d) Required Contribution by New York City in Program Costs.--
``(1) Contract requirement.--
``(A) In general.--No funds may be disbursed from
the World Trade Center Health Program Fund under section
3351 unless New York City has entered into a contract
with the WTC Program Administrator under which New York
City agrees, in a form and manner specified by the
Administrator, to pay the full contribution described in
subparagraph (B) in accordance with this subsection on a
timely basis, plus any interest owed pursuant to
subparagraph (E)(i). Such contract shall specify the
terms under which New York City shall be considered to
have made the full payment required for a quarter for
purposes of subsection (b)(2).
``(B) Full contribution amount.--Under such
contract, with respect to the last calendar quarter of
fiscal

[[Page 3655]]

year 2011 and each calendar quarter in fiscal years 2012
through 2015 the full contribution amount under this
subparagraph shall be equal to 10 percent of the
expenditures in carrying out this title for the
respective quarter and with respect to calendar quarters
in fiscal year 2016, such full contribution amount shall
be equal to \1/9\ of the Federal expenditures in
carrying out this title for the respective quarter.
``(C) Satisfaction of payment obligation.--The
payment obligation under such contract may not be
satisfied through any of the following:
``(i) An amount derived from Federal sources.
``(ii) An amount paid before the date of the
enactment of this title.
``(iii) An amount paid to satisfy a judgment
or as part of a settlement related to injuries or
illnesses arising out of the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks.
``(D) Timing of contribution.--The payment
obligation under such contract for a calendar quarter in
a fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day
of the second succeeding calendar quarter.
``(E) Compliance.--
``(i) Interest for late payment.--If New York
City fails to pay to the WTC Program Administrator
pursuant to such contract the amount required for
any calendar quarter by the day specified in
subparagraph (D), interest shall accrue on the
amount not so paid at the rate (determined by the
Administrator) based on the average yield to
maturity, plus 1 percentage point, on outstanding
municipal bonds issued by New York City with a
remaining maturity of at least 1 year.
``(ii) Recovery of amounts owed.--The amounts
owed to the WTC Program Administrator under such
contract shall be recoverable by the United States
in an action in the same manner as payments made
under title XVIII of the Social Security Act may
be recoverable in an action brought under section
1862(b)(2)(B)(iii) of such Act.
``(F) Deposit in fund.--The WTC Program Administer
shall deposit amounts paid under such contract into the
World Trade Center Health Program Fund under section
3351.
``(2) Payment of new york city share of monitoring and
treatment costs.--With respect to each calendar quarter for
which a contribution is required by New York City under the
contract under paragraph (1), the WTC Program Administrator
shall--
``(A) provide New York City with an estimate of such
amount of the required contribution at the beginning of
such quarter and with an updated estimate of such amount
at the beginning of each of the subsequent 2 quarters;
``(B) bill such amount directly to New York City;
and
``(C)
certify <> periodically,
for purposes of this subsection, whether or not New York
City has paid the amount so billed.

[[Page 3656]]

Such amount shall initially be estimated by the WTC Program
Administrator and shall be subject to adjustment and
reconciliation based upon actual expenditures in carrying out
this title.
``(3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed as authorizing the WTC Administrator, with
respect to a fiscal year, to reduce the numerical limitation
under section 3311(a)(4) or 3321(a)(3) for such fiscal year if
New York City fails to comply with paragraph (1) for a calendar
quarter in such fiscal year.

``(e) Work-Related Described.--For the purposes of this section, a
WTC-related health condition shall be treated as a condition that is
work-related if--
``(1) the condition is diagnosed in an enrolled WTC
responder, or in an individual who qualifies as a certified-
eligible WTC survivor on the basis of being a rescue, recovery,
or cleanup worker; or
``(2) with respect to the condition the individual has filed
and had established a claim under a workers' compensation law or
plan of the United States or a State, or other work-related
injury or illness benefit plan of the employer of such
individual.
``SEC. 3332. <> ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENT
AUTHORITY.

``The WTC Program Administrator may enter into arrangements with
other government agencies, insurance companies, or other third-party
administrators to provide for timely and accurate processing of claims
under sections 3312, 3313, 3322, and 3323.

``Subtitle C--Research Into Conditions

``SEC. 3341. <> RESEARCH REGARDING CERTAIN
HEALTH CONDITIONS RELATED TO SEPTEMBER
11 TERRORIST ATTACKS.

``(a) In General.--With respect to individuals, including enrolled
WTC responders and certified-eligible WTC survivors, receiving
monitoring or treatment under subtitle B, the WTC Program Administrator
shall conduct or support--
``(1) research on physical and mental health conditions that
may be related to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks;
``(2) research on diagnosing WTC-related health conditions
of such individuals, in the case of conditions for which there
has been diagnostic uncertainty; and
``(3) research on treating WTC-related health conditions of
such individuals, in the case of conditions for which there has
been treatment uncertainty.

The Administrator may provide such support through continuation and
expansion of research that was initiated before the date of the
enactment of this title and through the World Trade Center Health
Registry (referred to in section 3342), through a Clinical Center of
Excellence, or through a Data Center.
``(b) Types of Research.--The research under subsection (a)(1) shall
include epidemiologic and other research studies on WTC-related health
conditions or emerging conditions--
``(1) among enrolled WTC responders and certified-eligible
WTC survivors under treatment; and

[[Page 3657]]

``(2) in sampled populations outside the New York City
disaster area in Manhattan as far north as 14th Street and in
Brooklyn, along with control populations, to identify potential
for long-term adverse health effects in less exposed
populations.

``(c) Consultation.--The WTC Program Administrator shall carry out
this section in consultation with the WTC Scientific/Technical Advisory
Committee.
``(d) Application of Privacy and Human Subject Protections.--The
privacy and human subject protections applicable to research conducted
under this section shall not be less than such protections applicable to
research conducted or funded by the Department of Health and Human
Services.
``SEC. 3342. <> WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH
REGISTRY.

``For the purpose of ensuring ongoing data collection relating to
victims of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the WTC Program
Administrator shall ensure that a registry of such victims is maintained
that is at least as comprehensive as the World Trade Center Health
Registry maintained under the arrangements in effect as of April 20,
2009, with the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.

``Subtitle D--Funding

``SEC. 3351. <> WORLD TRADE CENTER HEALTH
PROGRAM FUND.

``(a) Establishment of Fund.--
``(1) In general.--There is established a fund to be known
as the World Trade Center Health Program Fund (referred to in
this section as the `Fund').
``(2) Funding.--Out of any money in the Treasury not
otherwise appropriated, there shall be deposited into the Fund
for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2016 (and the last
calendar quarter of fiscal year 2011)--
``(A) the Federal share, consisting of an amount
equal to the lesser of--
``(i) 90 percent of the expenditures in
carrying out this title for the respective fiscal
year (initially based on estimates, subject to
subsequent reconciliation based on actual
expenditures); or
``(ii)(I) $71,000,000 for the last calendar
quarter of fiscal year 2011, $318,000,000 for
fiscal year 2012, $354,000,000 for fiscal year
2013, $382,000,000 for fiscal year 2014, and
$431,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(II) subject to paragraph (4), an additional
amount for fiscal year 2016 from unexpended
amounts for previous fiscal years; plus
``(B) the New York City share, consisting of the
amount contributed under the contract under section
3331(d).
``(3) Contract requirement.--
``(A) In general.--No funds may be disbursed from
the Fund unless New York City has entered into a
contract with the WTC Program Administrator under
section 3331(d)(1).
``(B) Breach of contract.--In the case of a failure
to pay the amount so required under the contract--

[[Page 3658]]

``(i) the amount is recoverable under
subparagraph (E)(ii) of such section;
``(ii) such failure shall not affect the
disbursement of amounts from the Fund; and
``(iii) the Federal share described in
paragraph (2)(A) shall not be increased by the
amount so unpaid.
``(4) Aggregate limitation on funding beginning with fiscal
year 2016.--Beginning with fiscal year 2016, in no case shall
the share of Federal funds deposited into the Fund under
paragraph (2) for such fiscal year and previous fiscal years and
quarters exceed the sum of the amounts specified in paragraph
(2)(A)(ii)(I).

``(b) Mandatory Funds for Monitoring, Initial Health Evaluations,
Treatment, and Claims Processing.--
``(1) In general.--The amounts deposited into the Fund under
subsection (a)(2) shall be available, without further
appropriation, consistent with paragraph (2) and subsection (c),
to carry out subtitle B and sections 3302(a), 3303, 3304,
3305(a)(2), 3305(c), 3341, and 3342.
``(2) Limitation on mandatory funding.--This title does not
establish any Federal obligation for payment of amounts in
excess of the amounts available from the Fund for such purpose.
``(3) Limitation on authorization for further
appropriations.--This title does not establish any authorization
for appropriation of amounts in excess of the amounts available
from the Fund under paragraph (1).

``(c) Limits on Spending for Certain Purposes.--Of the amounts made
available under subsection (b)(1), not more than each of the following
amounts may be available for each of the following purposes:
``(1) Surviving immediate family members of firefighters.--
For the purposes of carrying out subtitle B with respect to WTC
responders described in section 3311(a)(2)(A)(ii)--
``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $100,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $400,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.
``(2) WTC health program scientific/technical advisory
committee.--For the purpose of carrying out section 3302(a)--
``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $25,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $100,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.
``(3) Education and outreach.--For the purpose of carrying
out section 3303--

[[Page 3659]]

``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $500,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $2,000,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.
``(4) Uniform data collection.--For the purpose of carrying
out section 3304 and for reimbursing Data Centers (as defined in
section 3305(b)(2)) for the costs incurred by such Centers in
carrying out activities under contracts entered into under
section 3305(a)(2)--
``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $2,500,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $10,000,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.
``(5) Research regarding certain health conditions.--For the
purpose of carrying out section 3341--
``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $3,750,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $15,000,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.
``(6) World trade center health registry.--For the purpose
of carrying out section 3342--
``(A) for the last calendar quarter of fiscal year
2011, $1,750,000;
``(B) for fiscal year 2012, $7,000,000; and
``(C) for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount
specified under this paragraph for the previous fiscal
year increased by the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (all items;
United States city average) as estimated by the
Secretary for the 12-month period ending with March of
the previous year.''.

TITLE II--SEPTEMBER 11TH VICTIM COMPENSATION FUND OF 2001

SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS.

Section 402 of the Air Transportation Safety and System
Stabilization Act (49 U.S.C. 40101 note) is amended--
(1) in paragraph (6) by inserting ``, or debris removal,
including under the World Trade Center Health Program
established under section 3001 of the Public Health Service Act,

[[Page 3660]]

and payments made pursuant to the settlement of a civil action
described in section 405(c)(3)(C)(iii)'' after ``September 11,
2001'';
(2) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new
paragraphs and redesignating subsequent paragraphs accordingly:
``(7) Contractor and subcontractor.--The term `contractor
and subcontractor' means any contractor or subcontractor (at any
tier of a subcontracting relationship), including any general
contractor, construction manager, prime contractor, consultant,
or any parent, subsidiary, associated or allied company,
affiliated company, corporation, firm, organization, or joint
venture thereof that participated in debris removal at any 9/11
crash site. Such term shall not include any entity, including
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, with a property
interest in the World Trade Center, on September 11, 2001,
whether fee simple, leasehold or easement, direct or indirect.
``(8) Debris removal.--The term `debris removal' means
rescue and recovery efforts, removal of debris, cleanup,
remediation, and response during the immediate aftermath of the
terrorist-related aircraft crashes of September 11, 2001, with
respect to a 9/11 crash site.'';
(3) by inserting after paragraph (10), as so redesignated,
the following new paragraph and redesignating the subsequent
paragraphs accordingly:
``(11) Immediate aftermath.--The term `immediate aftermath'
means any period beginning with the terrorist-related aircraft
crashes of September 11, 2001, and ending on May 30, 2002.'';
and
(4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(14) 9/11 crash site.--The term `9/11 crash site' means--
``(A) the World Trade Center site, Pentagon site,
and Shanksville, Pennsylvania site;
``(B) the buildings or portions of buildings that
were destroyed as a result of the terrorist-related
aircraft crashes of September 11, 2001;
``(C) any area contiguous to a site of such crashes
that the Special Master determines was sufficiently
close to the site that there was a demonstrable risk of
physical harm resulting from the impact of the aircraft
or any subsequent fire, explosions, or building
collapses (including the immediate area in which the
impact occurred, fire occurred, portions of buildings
fell, or debris fell upon and injured individuals); and
``(D) any area related to, or along, routes of
debris removal, such as barges and Fresh Kills.''.
SEC. 202. EXTENDED AND EXPANDED ELIGIBILITY FOR COMPENSATION.

(a) Information on Losses Resulting From Debris Removal Included in
Contents of Claim Form.--Section 405(a)(2)(B) of the Air Transportation
Safety and System Stabilization Act (49 U.S.C. 40101 note) is amended--
(1) in clause (i), by inserting ``, or debris removal during
the immediate aftermath'' after ``September 11, 2001'';
(2) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or debris removal during
the immediate aftermath'' after ``crashes''; and

[[Page 3661]]

(3) in clause (iii), by inserting ``or debris removal during
the immediate aftermath'' after ``crashes''.

(b) Extension of Deadline for Claims Under September 11th Victim
Compensation Fund of 2001.--Section 405(a)(3) of such Act <> is amended to read as follows:
``(3) Limitation.--
``(A) In general.--Except as provided by
subparagraph (B), no claim may be filed under paragraph
(1) after the date that is 2 years after the date on
which regulations are promulgated under section 407(a).
``(B) Exception.--A claim <> may
be filed under paragraph (1), in accordance with
subsection (c)(3)(A)(i), by an individual (or by a
personal representative on behalf of a deceased
individual) during the period beginning on the date on
which the regulations are updated under section 407(b)
and ending on the date that is 5 years after the date on
which such regulations are updated.''.

(c) Requirements for Filing Claims During Extended Filing Period.--
Section 405(c)(3) of such Act is <> amended--
(1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as
subparagraphs (B) and (C), respectively; and
(2) by inserting before subparagraph (B), as so
redesignated, the following new subparagraph:
``(A) Requirements for filing claims during extended
filing period.--
``(i) Timing requirements for filing claims.--
An individual (or a personal representative on
behalf of a deceased individual) may file a claim
during the period described in subsection
(a)(3)(B) as follows:
``(I) In the case that the Special
Master determines the individual knew
(or reasonably should have known) before
the date specified in clause (iii) that
the individual suffered a physical harm
at a 9/11 crash site as a result of the
terrorist-related aircraft crashes of
September 11, 2001, or as a result of
debris removal, and that the individual
knew (or should have known) before such
specified date that the individual was
eligible to file a claim under this
title, the individual may file a claim
not later than the date that is 2 years
after such specified date.
``(II) In the case that the Special
Master determines the individual first
knew (or reasonably should have known)
on or after the date specified in clause
(iii) that the individual suffered such
a physical harm or that the individual
first knew (or should have known) on or
after such specified date that the
individual was eligible to file a claim
under this title, the individual may
file a claim not later than the last day
of the 2-year period beginning on the
date the Special Master determines the
individual first knew (or should have
known) that the individual both suffered
from such harm and was eligible to file
a claim under this title.

[[Page 3662]]

``(ii) Other eligibility requirements for
filing claims.--An individual may file a claim
during the period described in subsection
(a)(3)(B) only if--
``(I) the individual was treated by
a medical professional for suffering
from a physical harm described in clause
(i)(I) within a reasonable time from the
date of discovering such harm; and
``(II) the individual's physical
harm is verified by contemporaneous
medical records created by or at the
direction of the medical professional
who provided the medical care.
``(iii) Date specified.--The date specified in
this clause is the date on which the regulations
are updated under section 407(a).''.

(d) Clarifying Applicability to All 9/11 Crash Sites.--Section
405(c)(2)(A)(i) of such Act <> is amended by
striking ``or the site of the aircraft crash at Shanksville,
Pennsylvania'' and inserting ``the site of the aircraft crash at
Shanksville, Pennsylvania, or any other 9/11 crash site''.

(e) Inclusion of Physical Harm Resulting From Debris Removal.--
Section 405(c) of such Act is <> amended in
paragraph (2)(A)(ii), by inserting ``or debris removal'' after ``air
crash''.

(f) Limitations on Civil Actions.--
(1) Application to damages related to debris removal.--
Clause (i) of section 405(c)(3)(C) of such Act, as redesignated
by subsection <> (c), is amended by
inserting ``, or for damages arising from or related to debris
removal'' after ``September 11, 2001''.
(2) Pending actions.--Clause (ii) of such section, as so
redesignated, is amended to read as follows:
``(ii) Pending actions.--In the case of an
individual who is a party to a civil action
described in clause (i), such individual may not
submit a claim under this title--
``(I) during the period described in
subsection (a)(3)(A) unless such
individual withdraws from such action by
the date that is 90 days after the date
on which regulations are promulgated
under section 407(a); and
``(II) during the period described
in subsection (a)(3)(B) unless such
individual withdraws from such action by
the date that is 90 days after the date
on which the regulations are updated
under section 407(b).''.
(3) Settled actions.--Such section, as so redesignated, is
further amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
``(iii) Settled actions.--In the case of an
individual who settled a civil action described in
clause (i), such individual may not submit a claim
under this title unless such action was commenced
after December 22, 2003, and a release of all
claims in such action was tendered prior to the
date on which the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and
Compensation Act of 2010 was enacted.''.

[[Page 3663]]

SEC. 203. REQUIREMENT TO UPDATE REGULATIONS.

Section 407 of the Air Transportation Safety and System
Stabilization Act (49 U.S.C. 40101 note) is amended--
(1) by striking ``Not later than'' and inserting ``(a) In
General.--Not later than''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(b) Updated Regulations.--Not <> later than 180
days after the date of the enactment of the James Zadroga 9/11 Health
and Compensation Act of 2010, the Special Master shall update the
regulations promulgated under subsection (a) to the extent necessary to
comply with the provisions of title II of such Act.''.
SEC. 204. LIMITED LIABILITY FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS.

Section 408(a) of the Air Transportation Safety and System
Stabilization Act (49 U.S.C. 40101 note) is amended by adding at the end
the following new paragraphs:
``(4) Liability for certain claims.--Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, liability for all claims and actions
(including claims or actions that have been previously resolved,
that are currently pending, and that may be filed) for
compensatory damages, contribution or indemnity, or any other
form or type of relief, arising from or related to debris
removal, against the City of New York, any entity (including the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey) with a property
interest in the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001
(whether fee simple, leasehold or easement, or direct or
indirect) and any contractors and subcontractors, shall not be
in an amount that exceeds the sum of the following, as may be
applicable:
``(A) The amount of funds of the WTC Captive
Insurance Company, including the cumulative interest.
``(B) The amount of all available insurance
identified in schedule 2 of the WTC Captive Insurance
Company insurance policy.
``(C) As it relates to the limitation of liability
of the City of New York, the amount that is the greater
of the City of New York's insurance coverage or
$350,000,000. In determining the amount of the City's
insurance coverage for purposes of the previous
sentence, any amount described in subparagraphs (A) and
(B) shall not be included.
``(D) As it relates to the limitation of liability
of any entity, including the Port Authority of New York
and New Jersey, with a property interest in the World
Trade Center on September 11, 2001 (whether fee simple,
leasehold or easement, or direct or indirect), the
amount of all available liability insurance coverage
maintained by any such entity.
``(E) As it relates to the limitation of liability
of any individual contractor or subcontractor, the
amount of all available liability insurance coverage
maintained by such contractor or subcontractor on
September 11, 2001.
``(5) Priority <> of claims
payments.--Payments to plaintiffs who obtain a settlement or
judgment with respect to a claim or action to which paragraph
(4) applies, shall be paid solely from the following funds in
the following order, as may be applicable:
``(A) The funds described in subparagraph (A) or (B)
of paragraph (4).

[[Page 3664]]

``(B) If there are no funds available as described
in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (4), the funds
described in subparagraph (C) of such paragraph.
``(C) If there are no funds available as described
in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (4), the
funds described in subparagraph (D) of such paragraph.
``(D) If there are no funds available as described
in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (4),
the funds described in subparagraph (E) of such
paragraph.
``(6) Declaratory judgment actions and direct action.--Any
claimant to a claim or action to which paragraph (4) applies
may, with respect to such claim or action, either file an action
for a declaratory judgment for insurance coverage or bring a
direct action against the insurance company involved, except
that no such action for declaratory judgment or direct action
may be commenced until after the funds available in subparagraph
(A), (B), (C), and (D) of paragraph (5) have been exhausted
consistent with the order described in such paragraph for
payment.''.
SEC. 205. FUNDING; ATTORNEY FEES.

Section 406 of the Air Transportation Safety and System
Stabilization Act (49 U.S.C. 40101 note) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Not later than'' and
inserting ``Subject to the limitations under subsection (d), not
later than'';
(2) in subsection (b)--
(A) by inserting ``in the amounts provided under
subsection (d)(1)'' after ``appropriations Acts''; and
(B) by inserting ``subject to the limitations under
subsection (d)'' before the period; and
(3) by adding at the end the following new subsections:

``(d) Limitation.--
``(1) In general.--The total amount of Federal funds paid
for compensation under this title, with respect to claims filed
on or after the date on which the regulations are updated under
section 407(b), shall not exceed <> $2,775,000,000. Of such amounts, not to exceed
$875,000,000 shall be available to pay such claims during the 5-
year period beginning on such date.
``(2) Pro-ration <> and payment of
remaining claims.--
``(A) In general.--The Special Master shall ratably
reduce the amount of compensation due claimants under
this title in a manner to ensure, to the extent
possible, that--
``(i) all claimants who, before application of
the limitation under the second sentence of
paragraph (1), would have been determined to be
entitled to a payment under this title during such
5-year period, receive a payment during such
period; and
``(ii) the total amount of all such payments
made during such 5-year period do not exceed the
amount available under the second sentence of
paragraph (1) to pay claims during such period.
``(B) Payment of remainder of claim amounts.--
In <> any case in which the amount of a
claim is ratably reduced pursuant to subparagraph (A),
on or after the first day after the 5-year period
described in paragraph

[[Page 3665]]

(1), but in no event later than 1 year after such 5-year
period, the Special Master shall pay to the claimant the
amount that is equal to the difference between--
``(i) the amount that the claimant would have
been paid under this title during such period
without regard to the limitation under the second
sentence of paragraph (1) applicable to such
period; and
``(ii) the amount the claimant was paid under
this title during such period.
``(C) Termination.--Upon completion of all payments
pursuant to this subsection, the Victim's Compensation
Fund shall be permanently closed.

``(e) Attorney Fees.--
``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any contract, the
representative of an individual may not charge, for services
rendered in connection with the claim of an individual under
this title, more than 10 percent of an award made under this
title on such claim.
``(2) Limitation.--
``(A) In general.--Except as provided in
subparagraph (B), in the case of an individual who was
charged a legal fee in connection with the settlement of
a civil action described in section 405(c)(3)(C)(iii),
the representative of the individual may not charge any
amount for compensation for services rendered in
connection with a claim filed under this title.
``(B) Exception.--If the legal fee charged in
connection with the settlement of a civil action
described in section 405(c)(3)(C)(iii) of an individual
is less than 10 percent of the aggregate amount of
compensation awarded to such individual through such
settlement, the representative of such individual may
charge an amount for compensation for services rendered
to the extent that such amount charged is not more
than--
``(i) 10 percent of such aggregate amount
through the settlement, minus
``(ii) the total amount of all legal fees
charged for services rendered in connection with
such settlement.
``(3) Discretion to lower fee.--In the event that the
special master finds that the fee limit set by paragraph (1) or
(2) provides excessive compensation for services rendered in
connection with such claim, the Special Master may, in the
discretion of the Special Master, award as reasonable
compensation for services rendered an amount lesser than that
permitted for in paragraph (1).''.

TITLE III--REVENUE RELATED PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. EXCISE TAX ON CERTAIN FOREIGN PROCUREMENT.

(a) Imposition of Tax.--
(1) In general.--Subtitle D of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter:

[[Page 3666]]

``CHAPTER 50--FOREIGN PROCUREMENT

``Sec. 5000C. Imposition of tax on certain foreign procurement.

``SEC. 5000C. <> IMPOSITION OF TAX ON CERTAIN
FOREIGN PROCUREMENT.

``(a) Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed on any foreign
person that receives a specified Federal procurement payment a tax equal
to 2 percent of the amount of such specified Federal procurement
payment.
``(b) Specified Federal Procurement <> Payment.--
For purposes of this section, the term `specified Federal procurement
payment' means any payment made pursuant to a contract with the
Government of the United States for--
``(1) the provision of goods, if such goods are manufactured
or produced in any country which is not a party to an
international procurement agreement with the United States, or
``(2) the provision of services, if such services are
provided in any country which is not a party to an international
procurement agreement with the United States.

``(c) Foreign Person.--For purposes of this section, the term
`foreign person' means any person other than a United States person.
``(d) Administrative Provisions.--
``(1) Withholding.--The amount deducted and withheld under
chapter 3 shall be increased by the amount of tax imposed by
this section on such payment.
``(2) Other administrative provisions.--For purposes of
subtitle F, any tax imposed by this section shall be treated as
a tax imposed by subtitle A.''.
(2) Clerical amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle
D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at
the end the following new item:

``Chapter 50--Foreign Procurement''.

(3) Effective <> date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall
apply to payments received pursuant to contracts entered into on
and after the date of the enactment of this Act.

(b) Prohibition <> on Reimbursement of
Fees.--
(1) In general.--The head of each executive agency shall
take any and all measures necessary to ensure that no funds are
disbursed to any foreign contractor in order to reimburse the
tax imposed under section 5000C of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986.
(2) Annual review.--The Administrator for Federal
Procurement Policy shall annually review the contracting
activities of each executive agency to monitor compliance with
the requirements of paragraph (1).
(3) Executive agency.--For <> purposes of
this subsection, the term ``executive agency'' has the meaning
given the term in section 4 of the Office of Federal Procurement
Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 403).

(c) Application.--This <> section and the
amendments made by this section shall be applied in a manner consistent
with United States obligations under international agreements.

[[Page 3667]]

SEC. 302. RENEWAL OF FEES FOR VISA-DEPENDENT EMPLOYERS.

Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 402 of Public Law 111-
230 <> are amended by striking ``2014'' each place
that such appears and inserting ``2015''.

TITLE IV--BUDGETARY EFFECTS

SEC. 401. COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTORY PAY-AS-YOU-GO ACT OF 2010.

The budgetary effects of this Act, for the purpose of complying with
the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by
reference to the latest statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO
Legislation'' for this Act, submitted for printing in the Congressional
Record by the Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, provided that
such statement has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.

Approved January 2, 2011.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--H.R. 847:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE REPORTS: No. 111-560, Pt. 1 (Comm. on Energy and Commerce) and
Pt. 2 (Comm. on the Judiciary).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 156 (2010):
July 29, considered and failed House.
Sept. 29, considered and passed House.
Dec. 22, considered and passed Senate, amended. House
concurred in Senate amendment.
DAILY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS (2011):
Jan. 2, Presidential statement.

[United States Statutes at Large, Volume 124, 111th Congress, 2nd Session]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov]


Public Law 111-152
111th Congress

An Act


 
To provide for reconciliation pursuant to Title II of the concurrent
resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2010 (S. Con. Res.
13). <>

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, <>
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

(a) Short <> Title.--This Act may be cited
as the ``Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010''.

(b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.

TITLE I--COVERAGE, MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND REVENUES

Subtitle A--Coverage

Sec. 1001. Tax credits.
Sec. 1002. Individual responsibility.
Sec. 1003. Employer responsibility.
Sec. 1004. Income definitions.
Sec. 1005. Implementation funding.

Subtitle B--Medicare

Sec. 1101. Closing the medicare prescription drug ``donut hole''.
Sec. 1102. Medicare Advantage payments.
Sec. 1103. Savings from limits on MA plan administrative costs.
Sec. 1104. Disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments.
Sec. 1105. Market basket updates.
Sec. 1106. Physician ownership-referral.
Sec. 1107. Payment for imaging services.
Sec. 1108. PE GPCI adjustment for 2010.
Sec. 1109. Payment for qualifying hospitals.

Subtitle C--Medicaid

Sec. 1201. Federal funding for States.
Sec. 1202. Payments to primary care physicians.
Sec. 1203. Disproportionate share hospital payments.
Sec. 1204. Funding for the territories.
Sec. 1205. Delay in Community First Choice option.
Sec. 1206. Drug rebates for new formulations of existing drugs.

Subtitle D--Reducing Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

Sec. 1301. Community mental health centers.
Sec. 1302. Medicare prepayment medical review limitations.
Sec. 1303. Funding to fight fraud, waste, and abuse.
Sec. 1304. 90-day period of enhanced oversight for initial claims of DME
suppliers.

Subtitle E--Provisions Relating to Revenue

Sec. 1401. High-cost plan excise tax.
Sec. 1402. Unearned income Medicare contribution.
Sec. 1403. Delay of limitation on health flexible spending arrangements
under cafeteria plans.

[[Page 1030]]

Sec. 1404. Brand name pharmaceuticals.
Sec. 1405. Excise tax on medical device manufacturers.
Sec. 1406. Health insurance providers.
Sec. 1407. Delay of elimination of deduction for expenses allocable to
medicare part D subsidy.
Sec. 1408. Elimination of unintended application of cellulosic biofuel
producer credit.
Sec. 1409. Codification of economic substance doctrine and penalties.
Sec. 1410. Time for payment of corporate estimated taxes.

Subtitle F--Other Provisions

Sec. 1501. Community college and career training grant program.

TITLE II--EDUCATION AND HEALTH

Subtitle A--Education

Sec. 2001. Short title; references.

Part I--Investing in Students and Families

Sec. 2101. Federal Pell Grants.
Sec. 2102. College access challenge grant program.
Sec. 2103. Investment in historically black colleges and universities
and minority-serving institutions.

Part II--Student Loan Reform

Sec. 2201. Termination of Federal Family Education Loan appropriations.
Sec. 2202. Termination of Federal loan insurance program.
Sec. 2203. Termination of applicable interest rates.
Sec. 2204. Termination of Federal payments to reduce student interest
costs.
Sec. 2205. Termination of FFEL PLUS Loans.
Sec. 2206. Federal Consolidation Loans.
Sec. 2207. Termination of Unsubsidized Stafford Loans for middle-income
borrowers.
Sec. 2208. Termination of special allowances.
Sec. 2209. Origination of Direct Loans at institutions outside the
United States.
Sec. 2210. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 2211. Terms and conditions of loans.
Sec. 2212. Contracts; mandatory funds.
Sec. 2213. Income-based repayment.

Subtitle B--Health

Sec. 2301. Insurance reforms.
Sec. 2302. Drugs purchased by covered entities.
Sec. 2303. Community health centers.

TITLE I--COVERAGE, MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND REVENUES

Subtitle A--Coverage

SEC. 1001. TAX CREDITS.

(a) Premium Tax Credits.--Section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as added by section 1401 of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act and amended by section 10105 of such <> Act, is amended--
(1) in subsection (b)(3)(A)--
(A) in clause (i), by striking ``with respect to any
taxpayer'' and all that follows up to the end period and
inserting: ``for any taxable year shall be the
percentage such that the applicable percentage for any
taxpayer whose household income is within an income tier
specified in the following table shall increase, on a
sliding scale in a linear manner, from the initial
premium percentage to

[[Page 1031]]

the final premium percentage specified in such table for
such income tier:


``In the case of household
income (expressed as a
percent of poverty line)     The initial premium    The final premium
within the following income     percentage is--       percentage is--
tier:

Up to 133%                    2.0%                  2.0%
133% up to 150%               3.0%                  4.0%
150% up to 200%               4.0%                  6.3%
200% up to 250%               6.3%                  8.05%
250% up to 300%               8.05%                 9.5%
300% up to 400%               9.5%                  9.5%''; and



(B) by striking clauses (ii) and (iii), and
inserting the following:
``(ii) Indexing.--
``(I) In general.--Subject to
subclause (II), in the case of taxable
years beginning in any calendar year
after 2014, the initial and final
applicable percentages under clause (i)
(as in effect for the preceding calendar
year after application of this clause)
shall be adjusted to reflect the excess
of the rate of premium growth for the
preceding calendar year over the rate of
income growth for the preceding calendar
year.
``(II) Additional adjustment.--
Except as provided in subclause (III),
in the case of any calendar year after
2018, the percentages described in
subclause (I) shall, in addition to the
adjustment under subclause (I), be
adjusted to reflect the excess (if any)
of the rate of premium growth estimated
under subclause (I) for the preceding
calendar year over the rate of growth in
the consumer price index for the
preceding calendar year.
``(III) Failsafe.--
Subclause <> (II)
shall apply for any calendar year only
if the aggregate amount of premium tax
credits under this section and cost-
sharing reductions under section 1402 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act for the preceding calendar year
exceeds an amount equal to 0.504 percent
of the gross domestic product for the
preceding calendar year.''; and
(2) in subsection (c)(2)(C)--
(A) by striking ``9.8 percent'' in clauses (i)(II)
and (iv) and inserting ``9.5 percent''; and
(B) by striking ``(b)(3)(A)(iii)'' in clause (iv)
and inserting ``(b)(3)(A)(ii)''.

(b) Cost Sharing.--Section 1402(c) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care <> Act is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1)(B)(i)--
(A) in subclause (I), by striking ``90'' and
inserting ``94'';
(B) in subclause (II)--
(i) by striking ``80'' and inserting ``87'';
and
(ii) by striking ``and''; and

[[Page 1032]]

(C) by striking subclause (III) and inserting the
following:
``(III) 73 percent in the case of an
eligible insured whose household income
is more than 200 percent but not more
than 250 percent of the poverty line for
a family of the size involved; and
``(IV) 70 percent in the case of an
eligible insured whose household income
is more than 250 percent but not more
than 400 percent of the poverty line for
a family of the size involved.''; and
(2) in paragraph (2)--
(A) in subparagraph (A)--
(i) by striking ``90'' and inserting ``94'';
and
(ii) by striking ``and'';
(B) in subparagraph (B)--
(i) by striking ``80'' and inserting ``87'';
and
(ii) by striking the period and inserting ``;
and''; and
(C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the
following new subparagraph:
``(C) in the case of an eligible insured whose
household income is more than 200 percent but not more
than 250 percent of the poverty line for a family of the
size involved, increase the plan's share of the total
allowed costs of benefits provided under the plan to 73
percent of such costs.''.
SEC. 1002. INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY.

(a) Amounts.--Section 5000A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as added by section 1501(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act and amended by section 10106 of <> such Act, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (2)(B)--
(A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by--
(i) inserting ``the excess of'' before ``the
taxpayer's household income''; and
(ii) inserting ``for the taxable year over the
amount of gross income specified in section
6012(a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer'' before
``for the taxable year'';
(B) in clause (i), by striking ``0.5'' and inserting
``1.0'';
(C) in clause (ii), by striking ``1.0'' and
inserting ``2.0''; and
(D) in clause (iii), by striking ``2.0'' and
inserting ``2.5''; and
(2) in paragraph (3)--
(A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$750'' and
inserting ``$695'';
(B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``$495'' and
inserting ``$325''; and
(C) in subparagraph (D)--
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ``$750'' and inserting ``$695''; and
(ii) in clause (i), by striking ``$750'' and
inserting ``$695''.

(b) Threshold.--Section 5000A of such Code, as so added and amended,
is amended--
(1) by striking subsection (c)(4)(D); and
(2) in subsection (e)(2)--

[[Page 1033]]

(A) by striking ``under 100 percent of poverty
line'' and inserting ``below filing threshold''; and
(B) by striking all that follows ``less than'' and
inserting ``the amount of gross income specified in
section 6012(a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer.''.
SEC. 1003. EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY.

(a) Payment Calculation.--Subparagraph (D) of subsection (d)(2) of
section 4980H of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section
1513 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended by
section 10106 of such Act, <> is amended to
read as follows:
``(D) Application of employer size to assessable
penalties.--
``(i) In general.--The number of individuals
employed by an applicable large employer as full-
time employees during any month shall be reduced
by 30 solely for purposes of calculating--
``(I) the assessable payment under
subsection (a), or
``(II) the overall limitation under
subsection (b)(2).
``(ii) Aggregation.--In the case of persons
treated as 1 employer under subparagraph (C)(i),
only 1 reduction under subclause (I) or (II) shall
be allowed with respect to such persons and such
reduction shall be allocated among such persons
ratably on the basis of the number of full-time
employees employed by each such person.''.

(b) Applicable Payment Amount.--Section 4980H of such Code, as so
added and amended, is amended--
(1) in the flush text following subsection (c)(1)(B), by
striking ``400 percent of the applicable payment amount'' and
inserting ``an amount equal to \1/12\ of $3,000'';
(2) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``$750'' and inserting
``$2,000''; and
(3) in subsection (d)(5)(A), in the matter preceding clause
(i), by striking ``subsection (b)(2) and (d)(1)'' and inserting
``subsection (b) and paragraph (1)''.

(c) Counting Part-time Workers in Setting the Threshold for Employer
Responsibility.--Section 4980H(d)(2) of such Code, as so added and
amended and as amended by subsection (a), is amended by adding at the
end the following new subparagraph:
``(E) Full-time equivalents treated as full-time
employees.--Solely for purposes of determining whether
an employer is an applicable large employer under this
paragraph, an employer shall, in addition to the number
of full-time employees for any month otherwise
determined, include for such month a number of full-time
employees determined by dividing the aggregate number of
hours of service of employees who are not full-time
employees for the month by 120.''.

(d) Eliminating Waiting Period Assessment.--Section 4980H of such
Code, as so added and amended and as amended by the preceding
subsections, is amended by striking subsection (b) and redesignating
subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (b), (c), and (d),
respectively.

[[Page 1034]]

SEC. 1004. INCOME DEFINITIONS.

(a) Modified Adjusted Gross Income.--
(1) In general.--The following provisions of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended by striking ``modified
gross'' each place it appears and inserting ``modified adjusted
gross'':
(A) Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 36B(d)(2)(A), as
added by section 1401 of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act. <>
(B) Section 6103(l)(21)(A)(iv), as added by section
1414 of such Act. <>
(C) Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 5000A(c)(4), as
added by section 1501(b) <> of such
Act.
(2) Definition.--
(A) Section 36B(d)(2)(B) of such Code, as so added,
is amended to read as follows:
``(B) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term
`modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross
income increased by--
``(i) any amount excluded from gross income
under section 911, and
``(ii) any amount of interest received or
accrued by the taxpayer during the taxable year
which is exempt from tax.''.
(B) Section 5000A(c)(4)(C) of such Code, as so
added, is amended to read as follows:
``(C) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term
`modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross
income increased by--
``(i) any amount excluded from gross income
under section 911, and
``(ii) any amount of interest received or
accrued by the taxpayer during the taxable year
which is exempt from tax.''.

(b) Modified Adjusted Gross Income Definition.--
(1) Medicaid.--Section 1902 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1396a) is amended by striking ``modified gross income''
each place it appears in the text and headings of the following
provisions and inserting ``modified adjusted gross income'':
(A) Paragraph (14) of subsection (e), as added by
section 2002(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act.
(B) Subsection (gg)(4)(A), as added by section
2001(b) of such Act.
(2) Chip.--
(A) State plan requirements.--Section
2102(b)(1)(B)(v) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
1397bb(b)(1)(B)(v)), as added by section 2101(d)(1) of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is
amended by striking ``modified gross income'' and
inserting ``modified adjusted gross income''.
(B) Plan administration.--Section 2107(e)(1)(E) of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)(E)), as
added by section 2101(d)(2) of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, is amended by striking
``modified gross income'' and inserting ``modified
adjusted gross income''.

[[Page 1035]]

(c) No Excess Payments.--Section 36B(f) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as added by section 1401(a) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, <> is amended by adding at the
end the following new paragraph:
``(3) Information requirement.--Each Exchange (or any person
carrying out 1 or more responsibilities of an Exchange under
section 1311(f)(3) or 1321(c) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act) shall provide the following information to
the Secretary and to the taxpayer with respect to any health
plan provided through the Exchange:
``(A) The level of coverage described in section
1302(d) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act and the period such coverage was in effect.
``(B) The total premium for the coverage without
regard to the credit under this section or cost-sharing
reductions under section 1402 of such Act.
``(C) The aggregate amount of any advance payment of
such credit or reductions under section 1412 of such
Act.
``(D) The name, address, and TIN of the primary
insured and the name and TIN of each other individual
obtaining coverage under the policy.
``(E) Any information provided to the Exchange,
including any change of circumstances, necessary to
determine eligibility for, and the amount of, such
credit.
``(F) Information necessary to determine whether a
taxpayer has received excess advance payments.''.

(d) Adult Dependents.--
(1) Exclusion of amounts expended for medical care.--The
first sentence of section 105(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 <> (relating to amounts expended for
medical care) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and his dependents'' and inserting
``his dependents''; and
(B) by inserting before the period the following:
``, and any child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of
the taxpayer who as of the end of the taxable year has
not attained age 27''.
(2) Self-employed health insurance deduction.--Section
162(l)(1) of such Code <> is amended to read
as follows:
``(1) Allowance of deduction.--In the case of a taxpayer who
is an employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1), there
shall be allowed as a deduction under this section an amount
equal to the amount paid during the taxable year for insurance
which constitutes medical care for--
``(A) the taxpayer,
``(B) the taxpayer's spouse,
``(C) the taxpayer's dependents, and
``(D) any child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of
the taxpayer who as of the end of the taxable year has
not attained age 27.''.
(3) Coverage under self-employed deduction.--Section
162(l)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by inserting ``, or any
dependent, or individual described in subparagraph (D) of
paragraph (1) with respect to,'' after ``spouse of''.
(4) Sick and accident benefits provided to members of a
voluntary employees' beneficiary association and

[[Page 1036]]

their dependents.--Section 501(c)(9) of such Code <> is amended by adding at the end the following new
sentence: ``For purposes of providing for the payment of sick
and accident benefits to members of such an association and
their dependents, the term `dependent' shall include any
individual who is a child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of a
member who as of the end of the calendar year has not attained
age 27.''.
(5) Medical and other benefits for retired employees.--
Section 401(h) of such Code <> is amended by
adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of this
subsection, the term `dependent' shall include any individual
who is a child (as defined in section 152(f)(1)) of a retired
employee who as of the end of the calendar year has not attained
age 27.''.

(e) Five Percent Income Disregard for Certain Individuals.--Section
1902(e)(14) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(14)), as
amended by subsection (b)(1), is further amended--
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``No type'' and
inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (I), no type''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
``(I) Treatment of portion of modified adjusted
gross income.--For purposes of determining the income
eligibility of an individual for medical assistance
whose eligibility is determined based on the application
of modified adjusted gross income under subparagraph
(A), the State shall--
``(i) determine <> the
dollar equivalent of the difference between the
upper income limit on eligibility for such an
individual (expressed as a percentage of the
poverty line) and such upper income limit
increased by 5 percentage points; and
``(ii) notwithstanding the requirement in
subparagraph (A) with respect to use of modified
adjusted gross income, utilize as the applicable
income of such individual, in determining such
income eligibility, an amount equal to the
modified adjusted gross income applicable to such
individual reduced by such dollar equivalent
amount.''.
SEC. 1005. <> IMPLEMENTATION FUNDING.

(a) In General.--There is hereby established a Health Insurance
Reform Implementation Fund (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'')
within the Department of Health and Human Services to carry out the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and this Act (and the
amendments made by such Acts).
(b) Funding.--There is appropriated to the Fund, out of any funds in
the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,000,000,000 for Federal
administrative expenses to carry out such Act (and the amendments made
by such Acts).

Subtitle B--Medicare

SEC. 1101. CLOSING THE MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG ``DONUT HOLE''.

(a) Coverage Gap Rebate for 2010.--

[[Page 1037]]

(1) In general.--Section 1860D-42 of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395w-152) is amended by adding at the end the
following new subsection:

``(c) Coverage <> Gap Rebate for 2010.--
``(1) In general.--In <> the case of an
individual described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of section
1860D-14A(g)(1) who as of the last day of a calendar quarter in
2010 has incurred costs for covered part D drugs so that the
individual has exceeded the initial coverage limit under section
1860D-2(b)(3) for 2010, the Secretary shall provide for payment
from the Medicare Prescription Drug Account of $250 to the
individual by not later than the 15th day of the third month
following the end of such quarter.
``(2) Limitation.--The Secretary shall provide only 1
payment under this subsection with respect to any individual.''.
(2) Repeal of provision.--Section 3315 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (including the amendments
made by such section) <> is repealed, and
any provision of law amended or repealed by such sections is
hereby restored or revived as if such section had not been
enacted into law.

(b) Closing the Donut Hole.--Part D of title XVIII of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-101 et seq.), as amended by section 3301
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is further amended--
(1) in section <> 1860D-43--
(A) in subsection (b), by striking ``July 1, 2010''
and inserting ``January 1, 2011''; and
(B) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``July 1,
2010, and ending on December 31, 2010,'' and inserting
``January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2011,'';
(2) in section <> 1860D-14A--
(A) in subsection (a)--
(i) by striking ``July 1, 2010'' and inserting
``January 1, 2011''; and
(ii) by striking ``April 1, 2010'' and
inserting ``180 days after the date of the
enactment of this section'';
(B) in subsection (b)(1)(C)--
(i) in the heading, by striking ``2010 and'';
(ii) by striking ``July 1, 2010'' and
inserting ``January 1, 2011''; and
(iii) by striking ``May 1, 2010'' and
inserting ``not later than 30 days after the date
of the establishment of a model agreement under
subsection (a)'';
(C) in subsection (c)--
(i) in paragraph (1)(A)(iii), by striking
``July 1, 2010, and ending on December 31, 2011''
and inserting ``January 1, 2011, and ending on
December 31, 2011''; and
(ii) in paragraph (2), by striking ``2010''
and inserting ``2011'';
(D) in subsection (d)(2)(B), by striking ``July 1,
2010, and ending on December 31, 2010'' and inserting
``January 1, 2011, and ending on December 31, 2011'';
and
(E) in subsection (g)(1)--
(i) in the matter before subparagraph (A), by
striking ``an applicable drug'' and inserting ``a
covered part D drug'';

[[Page 1038]]

(ii) by adding ``and'' at the end of
subparagraph (C);
(iii) by striking subparagraph (D); and
(iv) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as
subparagraph (D); and
(3) in section <> 1860D-2(b)--
(A) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``The
coverage'' and inserting ``Subject to subparagraphs (C)
and (D), the coverage'';
(B) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``subparagraph
(A)(ii)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (A)(ii), (C),
and (D)'';
(C) by adding at the end of paragraph (2) the
following new subparagraphs:
``(C) Coverage for generic drugs in coverage gap.--
``(i) In general.--Except as provided in
paragraph (4), the coverage for an applicable
beneficiary (as defined in section 1860D-
14A(g)(1)) has coinsurance (for costs above the
initial coverage limit under paragraph (3) and
below the out-of-pocket threshold) for covered
part D drugs that are not applicable drugs under
section 1860D-14A(g)(2) that is--
``(I) equal to the generic-gap
coinsurance percentage (specified in
clause (ii)) for the year; or
``(II) actuarially equivalent (using
processes and methods established under
section 1860D-11(c)) to an average
expected payment of such percentage of
such costs for covered part D drugs that
are not applicable drugs under section
1860D-14A(g)(2).
``(ii) Generic-gap coinsurance percentage.--
The generic-gap coinsurance percentage specified
in this clause for--
``(I) 2011 is 93 percent;
``(II) 2012 and each succeeding year
before 2020 is the generic-gap
coinsurance percentage under this clause
for the previous year decreased by 7
percentage points; and
``(III) 2020 and each subsequent
year is 25 percent.
``(D) Coverage for applicable drugs in coverage
gap.--
``(i) In general.--Except as provided in
paragraph (4), the coverage for an applicable
beneficiary (as defined in section 1860D-
14A(g)(1)) has coinsurance (for costs above the
initial coverage limit under paragraph (3) and
below the out-of-pocket threshold) for the
negotiated price (as defined in section 1860D-
14A(g)(6)) of covered part D drugs that are
applicable drugs under section 1860D-14A(g)(2)
that is--
``(I) equal to the difference
between the applicable gap percentage
(specified in clause (ii) for the year)
and the discount percentage specified in
section 1860D-14A(g)(4)(A) for such
applicable drugs; or

[[Page 1039]]

``(II) actuarially equivalent (using
processes and methods established under
section 1860D-11(c)) to an average
expected payment of such percentage of
such costs, for covered part D drugs
that are applicable drugs under section
1860D-14A(g)(2).
``(ii) Applicable gap percentage.--The
applicable gap percentage specified in this clause
for--
``(I) 2013 and 2014 is 97.5 percent;
``(II) 2015 and 2016 is 95 percent;
``(III) 2017 is 90 percent;
``(IV) 2018 is 85 percent;
``(V) 2019 is 80 percent; and
``(VI) 2020 and each subsequent year
is 75 percent.'';
(D) in paragraph (3)(A), as restored under
subsection (a)(2), by striking ``paragraph (4)'' and
inserting ``paragraphs (2)(C), (2)(D), and (4)''; and
(E) in paragraph (4)(E), by inserting before the
period at the end the following: ``, except that
incurred costs shall not include the portion of the
negotiated price that represents the reduction in
coinsurance resulting from the application of paragraph
(2)(D)''; and
(4) in section 1860D-22(a)(2)(A), <> by inserting before the period at the end the following:
``, not taking into account the value of any discount or
coverage provided during the gap in prescription drug coverage
that occurs between the initial coverage limit under section
1860D-2(b)(3) during the year and the out-of-pocket threshold
specified in section 1860D-2(b)(4)(B)''.

(c) Conforming Amendment to AMP Under Medicaid.--Section
1927(k)(1)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
8(k)(1)(B)(i)), as amended by section 2503(a)(2)(B) of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subclause (III);
(2) by striking the period at the end of subclause (IV); and
(3) by adding at the end the following new subclause:
``(V) discounts provided by
manufacturers under section 1860D-
14A.''.

(d) Reducing Growth Rate of Out-of-pocket Cost Threshold.--Section
1860D-2(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-102(b)) is
amended--
(1) in paragraph (4)(B)(i)--
(A) in subclause (I), by striking ``or'' at the end;
(B) by redesignating subclause (II) as subclause
(VI); and
(C) by inserting after subclause (I) the following
new subclauses:
``(II) for each of years 2007
through 2013, is equal to the amount
specified in this subparagraph for the
previous year, increased by the annual
percentage increase described in
paragraph (6) for the year involved;
``(III) for 2014 and 2015, is equal
to the amount specified in this
subparagraph for the previous year,
increased by the annual percentage
increase

[[Page 1040]]

described in paragraph (6) for the year
involved, minus 0.25 percentage point;
``(IV) for each of years 2016
through 2019, is equal to the amount
specified in this subparagraph for the
previous year, increased by the lesser
of--
``(aa) the annual percentage
increase described in paragraph
(7) for the year involved, plus
2 percentage points; or
``(bb) the annual percentage
increase described in paragraph
(6) for the year;
``(V) for 2020, is equal to the
amount that would have been applied
under this subparagraph for 2020 if the
amendments made by section 1101(d)(1) of
the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act of 2010 had not been
enacted; or''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(7) Additional annual percentage increase.--The annual
percentage increase specified in this paragraph for a year is
equal to the annual percentage increase in the consumer price
index for all urban consumers (United States city average) for
the 12-month period ending in July of the previous year.''.
SEC. 1102. MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PAYMENTS.

(a) Repeal.--Effective <> as if included in the enactment of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, sections 3201 and 3203 of such Act
(and the amendments made by such sections) are repealed.

(b) Phase-in of Modified Benchmarks.--Section 1853 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23) is amended--
(1) in subsection (j)(1)(A), by striking ``(or, beginning
with 2007, \1/12\ of the applicable amount determined under
subsection (k)(1)) for the area for the year'' and inserting
``for the area for the year (or, for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010,
\1/12\ of the applicable amount determined under subsection
(k)(1) for the area for the year; for 2011, \1/12\ of the
applicable amount determined under subsection (k)(1) for the
area for 2010; and, beginning with 2012, \1/12\ of the blended
benchmark amount determined under subsection (n)(1) for the area
for the year)''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(n) Determination of Blended Benchmark Amount.--
``(1) In general.--For <> purposes of
subsection (j), subject to paragraphs (3), (4), and (5), the
term `blended benchmark amount' means for an area--
``(A) for 2012 the sum of--
``(i) \1/2\ of the applicable amount for the
area and year; and
``(ii) \1/2\ of the amount specified in
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year; and
``(B) for a subsequent year the amount specified in
paragraph (2)(A) for the area and year.
``(2) Specified amount.--
``(A) In general.--The amount specified in this
subparagraph for an area and year is the product of--
``(i) the base payment amount specified in
subparagraph (E) for the area and year adjusted to
take into

[[Page 1041]]

account the phase-out in the indirect costs of
medical education from capitation rates described
in subsection (k)(4); and
``(ii) the applicable percentage for the area
for the year specified under subparagraph (B).
``(B) Applicable percentage.--Subject to
subparagraph (D), the applicable percentage specified in
this subparagraph for an area for a year in the case of
an area that is ranked--
``(i) in the highest quartile under
subparagraph (C) for the previous year is 95
percent;
``(ii) in the second highest quartile under
such subparagraph for the previous year is 100
percent;
``(iii) in the third highest quartile under
such subparagraph for the previous year is 107.5
percent; or
``(iv) in the lowest quartile under such
subparagraph for the previous year is 115 percent.
``(C) Periodic ranking.--For purposes of this
paragraph in the case of an area located--
``(i) in 1 of the 50 States or the District of
Columbia, the Secretary shall rank such area in
each year specified under subsection (c)(1)(D)(ii)
based upon the level of the amount specified in
subparagraph (A)(i) for such areas; or
``(ii) in a territory, the Secretary shall
rank such areas in each such year based upon the
level of the amount specified in subparagraph
(A)(i) for such area relative to quartile rankings
computed under clause (i).
``(D) 1-year transition for changes in applicable
percentage.--If, for a year after 2012, there is a
change in the quartile in which an area is ranked
compared to the previous year, the applicable percentage
for the area in the year shall be the average of--
``(i) the applicable percentage for the area
for the previous year; and
``(ii) the applicable percentage that would
otherwise apply for the area for the year.
``(E) Base payment amount.--Subject to subparagraph
(F), the base payment amount specified in this
subparagraph--
``(i) for 2012 is the amount specified in
subsection (c)(1)(D) for the area for the year; or
``(ii) for a subsequent year that--
``(I) is not specified under
subsection (c)(1)(D)(ii), is the base
amount specified in this subparagraph
for the area for the previous year,
increased by the national per capita MA
growth percentage, described in
subsection (c)(6) for that succeeding
year, but not taking into account any
adjustment under subparagraph (C) of
such subsection for a year before 2004;
and
``(II) is specified under subsection
(c)(1)(D)(ii), is the amount specified
in subsection (c)(1)(D) for the area for
the year.

[[Page 1042]]

``(F) Application of indirect medical education
phase-out.--The base payment amount specified in
subparagraph (E) for a year shall be adjusted in the
same manner under paragraph (4) of subsection (k) as the
applicable amount is adjusted under such subsection.
``(3) Alternative phase-ins.--
``(A) 4-year phase-in for certain areas.--If the
difference between the applicable amount (as defined in
subsection (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected
2010 benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (C))
for the area is at least $30 but less than $50, the
blended benchmark amount for the area is--
``(i) for 2012 the sum of--
``(I) \3/4\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \1/4\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year;
``(ii) for 2013 the sum of--
``(I) \1/2\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \1/2\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year;
``(iii) for 2014 the sum of--
``(I) \1/4\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \3/4\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year; and
``(iv) for a subsequent year the amount
specified in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year.
``(B) 6-year phase-in for certain areas.--If the
difference between the applicable amount (as defined in
subsection (k)) for an area for 2010 and the projected
2010 benchmark amount (as defined in subparagraph (C))
for the area is at least $50, the blended benchmark
amount for the area is--
``(i) for 2012 the sum of--
``(I) \5/6\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \1/6\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year;
``(ii) for 2013 the sum of--
``(I) \2/3\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \1/3\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year;
``(iii) for 2014 the sum of--
``(I) \1/2\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \1/2\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year;
``(iv) for 2015 the sum of--
``(I) \1/3\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \2/3\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year; and
``(v) for 2016 the sum of--

[[Page 1043]]

``(I) \1/6\ of the applicable amount
for the area and year; and
``(II) \5/6\ of the amount specified
in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year; and
``(vi) for a subsequent year the amount
specified in paragraph (2)(A) for the area and
year.
``(C) Projected 2010 benchmark amount.--The
projected 2010 benchmark amount described in this
subparagraph for an area is equal to the sum of--
``(i) \1/2\ of the applicable amount (as
defined in subsection (k)) for the area for 2010;
and
``(ii) \1/2\ of the amount specified in
paragraph (2)(A) for the area for 2010 but
determined as if there were substituted for the
applicable percentage specified in clause (ii) of
such paragraph the sum of--
``(I) the applicable percent that
would be specified under subparagraph
(B) of paragraph (2) (determined without
regard to subparagraph (D) of such
paragraph) for the area for 2010 if any
reference in such paragraph to `the
previous year' were deemed a reference
to 2010; and
``(II) the applicable percentage
increase that would apply to a
qualifying plan in the area under
subsection (o) as if any reference in
such subsection to 2012 were deemed a
reference to 2010 and as if the
determination of a qualifying county
under paragraph (3)(B) of such
subsection were made for 2010.
``(4) Cap on benchmark amount.--In no case shall the blended
benchmark amount for an area for a year (determined taking into
account subsection (o)) be greater than the applicable amount
that would (but for the application of this subsection) be
determined under subsection (k)(1) for the area for the year.
``(5) Non-application to pace plans.--This subsection shall
not apply to payments to a PACE program under section 1894.''.

(c) Applicable Percentage Quality Increases.--Section 1853 of such
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23), as amended by subsection (b), is amended--
(1) in subsection (j), by inserting ``subject to subsection
(o),'' after ``For purposes of this part,'';
(2) in subsection (n)(2)(B), as added by subsection (b), by
inserting ``, subject to subsection (o)'' after ``as follows'';
and
(3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(o) Applicable Percentage Quality Increases.--
``(1) In general.--Subject <> to the
succeeding paragraphs, in the case of a qualifying plan with
respect to a year beginning with 2012, the applicable percentage
under subsection (n)(2)(B) shall be increased on a plan or
contract level, as determined by the Secretary--
``(A) for 2012, by 1.5 percentage points;
``(B) for 2013, by 3.0 percentage points; and
``(C) for 2014 or a subsequent year, by 5.0
percentage points.

[[Page 1044]]

``(2) Increase for qualifying plans in qualifying
counties.--The increase applied under paragraph (1) for a
qualifying plan located in a qualifying county for a year shall
be doubled.
``(3) Qualifying plans and qualifying county defined;
application of increases to low enrollment and new plans.--For
purposes of this subsection:
``(A) Qualifying plan.--
``(i) In general.--The term `qualifying plan'
means, for a year and subject to paragraph (4), a
plan that had a quality rating under paragraph (4)
of 4 stars or higher based on the most recent data
available for such year.
``(ii) Application of increases to low
enrollment plans.--
``(I) 2012.--
For <> 2012, the
term `qualifying plan' includes an MA
plan that the Secretary determines is
not able to have a quality rating under
paragraph (4) because of low enrollment.
``(II) 2013 and subsequent years.--
For 2013 and subsequent years, for
purposes of determining whether an MA
plan with low enrollment (as defined by
the Secretary) is included as a
qualifying plan, the Secretary shall
establish a method to apply to MA plans
with low enrollment (as defined by the
Secretary) the computation of quality
rating and the rating system under
paragraph (4).
``(iii) Application of increases to new
plans.--
``(I) In general.--A new MA plan
that meets criteria specified by the
Secretary shall be treated as a
qualifying plan, except that in applying
paragraph (1), the applicable percentage
under subsection (n)(2)(B) shall be
increased--
``(aa) for 2012, by 1.5
percentage points;
``(bb) for 2013, by 2.5
percentage points; and
``(cc) for 2014 or a
subsequent year, by 3.5
percentage points.
``(II) New ma plan defined.--The
term `new MA plan' means, with respect
to a year, a plan offered by an
organization or sponsor that has not had
a contract as a Medicare Advantage
organization in the preceding 3-year
period.
``(B) Qualifying county.--The term `qualifying
county' means, for a year, a county--
``(i) that has an MA capitation rate that, in
2004, was based on the amount specified in
subsection (c)(1)(B) for a Metropolitan
Statistical Area with a population of more than
250,000;
``(ii) for which, as of December 2009, of the
Medicare Advantage eligible individuals residing
in the county at least 25 percent of such
individuals were enrolled in Medicare Advantage
plans; and
``(iii) that has per capita fee-for-service
spending that is lower than the national monthly
per capita cost for expenditures for individuals
enrolled under

[[Page 1045]]

the original medicare fee-for-service program for
the year.
``(4) Quality determinations for application of increase.--
``(A) Quality determination.--The quality rating for
a plan shall be determined according to a 5-star rating
system (based on the data collected under section
1852(e)).
``(B) Plans that failed to report.--An MA plan which
does not report data that enables the Secretary to rate
the plan for purposes of this paragraph shall be counted
as having a rating of fewer than 3.5 stars.
``(5) Exception for pace plans.--This subsection shall not
apply to payments to a PACE program under section 1894.''.
(4) Determination of medicare part d low-income benchmark
premium.--Section 1860D-14(b)(2)(B)(iii) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-114(b)(2)(B)(iii)) as amended by section
3302 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is
amended by striking ``, determined without regard to any
reduction in such premium as a result of any beneficiary rebate
under section 1854(b)(1)(C) or bonus payment under section
1853(n)'' and inserting the following: ``and determined before
the application of the monthly rebate computed under section
1854(b)(1)(C)(i) for that plan and year involved and, in the
case of a qualifying plan, before the application of the
increase under section 1853(o) for that plan and year
involved''.

(d) Beneficiary Rebates.--Section 1854(b)(1)(C) of such Act (42
U.S.C. 1395w-24(b)(1)(C)), as amended by section 3202(b) of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, is further amended--
(1) in clause (i), by inserting ``(or the applicable rebate
percentage specified in clause (iii) in the case of plan years
beginning on or after January 1, 2012)'' after ``75 percent'';
and
(2) by striking clause (iii), by redesignating clauses (iv)
and (v) as clauses (vii) and (viii), respectively, and by
inserting after clause (ii) the following new clauses:
``(iii) Applicable rebate percentage.--The
applicable rebate percentage specified in this
clause for a plan for a year, based on the system
under section 1853(o)(4)(A), is the sum of--
``(I) the product of the old phase-
in proportion for the year under clause
(iv) and 75 percent; and
``(II) the product of the new phase-
in proportion for the year under clause
(iv) and the final applicable rebate
percentage under clause (v).
``(iv) Old and new phase-in proportions.--For
purposes of clause (iv)--
``(I) for 2012, the old phase-in
proportion is \2/3\ and the new phase-in
proportion is \1/3\;
``(II) for 2013, the old phase-in
proportion is \1/3\ and the new phase-in
proportion is \2/3\; and
``(III) for 2014 and any subsequent
year, the old phase-in proportion is 0
and the new phase-in proportion is 1.

[[Page 1046]]

``(v) Final applicable rebate percentage.--
Subject to clause (vi), the final applicable
rebate percentage under this clause is--
``(I) in the case of a plan with a
quality rating under such system of at
least 4.5 stars, 70 percent;
``(II) in the case of a plan with a
quality rating under such system of at
least 3.5 stars and less than 4.5 stars,
65 percent; and
``(III) in the case of a plan with a
quality rating under such system of less
than 3.5 stars, 50 percent.
``(vi) Treatment of low enrollment and new
plans.--For purposes of clause (v)--
``(I) for 2012, in the case of a
plan described in subclause (I) of
subsection (o)(3)(A)(ii), the plan shall
be treated as having a rating of 4.5
stars; and
``(II) for 2012 or a subsequent
year, in the case of a new MA plan (as
defined under subclause (III) of
subsection (o)(3)(A)(iii)) that is
treated as a qualifying plan pursuant to
subclause (I) of such subsection, the
plan shall be treated as having a rating
of 3.5 stars.''.

(e) Coding Intensity Adjustment.--Section 1853(a)(1)(C)(ii) of such
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(a)(1)(C)(ii)) is amended--
(1) in the heading, by striking ``during phaseout of budget
neutrality factor'' and inserting ``of coding adjustment'';
(2) in the matter before subclause (I), by striking
``through 2010'' and inserting ``and each subsequent year''; and
(3) in subclause (II)--
(A) in the first sentence, by inserting ``annually''
before ``conduct an analysis'';
(B) in the second sentence--
(i) by inserting ``on a timely basis'' after
``are incorporated''; and
(ii) by striking ``only for 2008, 2009, and
2010'' and inserting ``for 2008 and subsequent
years'';
(C) in the third sentence, by inserting ``and
updated as appropriate'' before the period at the end;
and
(D) by adding at the end the following new
subclauses:
``(III) In calculating each year's
adjustment, the adjustment factor shall
be for 2014, not less than the
adjustment factor applied for 2010, plus
1.3 percentage points; for each of years
2015 through 2018, not less than the
adjustment factor applied for the
previous year, plus 0.25 percentage
point; and for 2019 and each subsequent
year, not less than 5.7 percent.
``(IV) <> Such
adjustment shall be applied to risk
scores until the Secretary implements
risk adjustment using Medicare Advantage
diagnostic, cost, and use data.''.

(f) Repeal of Comparative Cost Adjustment Program.--Section 1860C-1
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-29), as added by section
241(a) of the Medicare Prescription Drug,

[[Page 1047]]

Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), is
repealed.
SEC. 1103. SAVINGS FROM LIMITS ON MA PLAN ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.

Section 1857(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-27(e))
is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(4) Requirement <> for minimum
medical loss ratio.--If the
Secretary <> determines for a contract
year (beginning with 2014) that an MA plan has failed to have a
medical loss ratio of at least .85--
``(A) the <> MA plan shall remit to
the Secretary an amount equal to the product of--
``(i) the total revenue of the MA plan under
this part for the contract year; and
``(ii) the difference between .85 and the
medical loss ratio;
``(B) for 3 consecutive contract years, the
Secretary shall not permit the enrollment of new
enrollees under the plan for coverage during the second
succeeding contract year; and
``(C) the Secretary shall terminate the plan
contract if the plan fails to have such a medical loss
ratio for 5 consecutive contract years.''.
SEC. 1104. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL (DSH) PAYMENTS.

Section 1886(r) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(r)), as
added by section 3133 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
and as amended by section 10316 of such Act, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``2015'' and inserting
``2014''; and
(2) in paragraph (2)--
(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by
striking ``2015'' and inserting ``2014'';
(B) in subparagraph (B)(i)--
(i) in the heading, by inserting ``2014,''
after ``years'';
(ii) in the matter preceding subclause (I), by
inserting ``2014,'' after ``each of fiscal
years'';
(iii) in subclause (I), by striking ``on such
Act'' and inserting ``on the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010''; and
(iv) in the matter following subclause (II),
by striking ``minus 1.5 percentage points'' and
inserting ``minus 0.1 percentage points for fiscal
year 2014 and minus 0.2 percentage points for each
of fiscal years 2015, 2016, and 2017''; and
(C) in subparagraph (B)(ii), in the matter following
subclause (II), by striking ``and, for each of 2018 and
2019, minus 1.5 percentage points'' and inserting
``minus 0.2 percentage points for each of fiscal years
2018 and 2019''.
SEC. 1105. MARKET BASKET UPDATES.

(a) IPPS.--Section 1886(b)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(B)), as amended by sections 3401(a)(4) and 10319(a)
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is amended--

[[Page 1048]]

(1) in clause (xii)--
(A) by placing the subclause (II) (inserted by
section 10319(a)(3) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act) immediately after subclause (I)
and, in such subclause (II), by striking ``and'' at the
end; and
(B) by striking subclause (III) and inserting the
following:
``(III) for fiscal year 2014, by 0.3 percentage point;
``(IV) for each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016, by 0.2
percentage point; and
``(V) for each of fiscal years 2017, 2018, and 2019, by 0.75
percentage point.''; and
(2) by striking clause (xiii).

(b) Long-term Care Hospitals.--Section 1886(m)(4) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(m)(4)), as added by section 3401(c) of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended by section
10319(b) of such Act, is amended--
(1) in subparagraph (A)--
(A) in clause (iii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
and
(B) by striking clause (iv) and inserting the
following:
``(iv) for rate year 2014, 0.3 percentage
point;
``(v) for each of rate years 2015 and 2016,
0.2 percentage point; and
``(vi) for each of rate years 2017, 2018, and
2019, 0.75 percentage point.'';
(2) by striking subparagraph (B); and
(3) by striking ``(4) Other adjustment.--'' and all that
follows through ``For purposes'' and inserting ``(4) Other
adjustment.--For purposes'' (and redesignating clauses (i)
through (vi) as subparagraphs (A) through (F), respectively,
with appropriate indentation).

(c) Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities.--Section 1886(j)(3)(D) of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(j)(3)(D)), as added by section
3401(d)(2) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended
by section 10319(c) of such Act, is amended--
(1) in clause (i)--
(A) by placing the subclause (II) (inserted by
section 10319(c)(3) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act) immediately after subclause (I)
and, in such subclause (II), by striking ``and'' at the
end; and
(B) by striking subclause (III) and inserting the
following:
``(III) for fiscal year 2014, 0.3
percentage point;
``(IV) for each of fiscal years 2015
and 2016, 0.2 percentage point; and
``(V) for each of fiscal years 2017,
2018, and 2019, 0.75 percentage
point.'';
(2) by striking clause (ii); and
(3) by striking ``(D) Other adjustment.--'' and all that
follows through ``For purposes'' and inserting ``(D) Other
adjustment.--For purposes'' (and redesignating subclauses (I)
through (V) as clauses (i) through (v), respectively, with
appropriate indentation).

(d) Psychiatric Hospitals.--Section 1886(s)(3) of the Social
Security Act, as added by section 3401(f) of the Patient Protection

[[Page 1049]]

and Affordable Care Act and amended by section 10319(e) of such
Act, <>  is amended--
(1) in subparagraph (A)--
(A) by placing the clause (ii) (inserted by section
10319(e)(3) of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act) immediately after clause (i) and, in such
clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end; and
(B) by striking clause (iii) and inserting the
following:
``(iii) for the rate year beginning in 2014,
0.3 percentage point;
``(iv) for each of the rate years beginning in
2015 and 2016, 0.2 percentage point; and
``(v) for each of the rate years beginning in
2017, 2018, and 2019, 0.75 percentage point.'';
(2) by striking subparagraph (B); and
(3) by striking ``(3) Other adjustment.--'' and all that
follows through ``For purposes'' and inserting ``(3) Other
adjustment.--For purposes'' (and redesignating clauses (i)
through (v) as subparagraphs (A) through (E), respectively, with
appropriate indentation).

(e) Outpatient Hospitals.--Section 1833(t)(3)(G) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(t)(3)(G)), as added by section 3401(i)(2)
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended by section
10319(g) of such Act, is amended--
(1) in clause (i)--
(A) by placing the subclause (II) (inserted by
section 10319(g)(3) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act) immediately after subclause (I)
and, in such subclause (II), by striking ``and'' at the
end; and
(B) by striking subclause (III) and inserting the
following:
``(III) for 2014, 0.3 percentage
point;
``(IV) for each of 2015 and 2016,
0.2 percentage point; and
``(V) for each of 2017, 2018, and
2019, 0.75 percentage point.'';
(2) by striking clause (ii); and
(3) by striking ``(G) Other adjustment.--'' and all that
follows through ``For purposes'' and inserting ``(G) Other
adjustment.--For purposes'' (and redesignating subclauses (I)
through (V) as clauses (i) through (v), respectively, with
appropriate indentation).
SEC. 1106. PHYSICIAN OWNERSHIP-REFERRAL.

Section 1877(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395nn(i)), as
added by section 6001(a)(3) of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act and as amended by section 10601(a) of such Act, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1)(A)(i), by striking ``August 1, 2010''
and inserting ``December 31, 2010''; and
(2) in paragraph (3)--
(A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ``an
applicable hospital (as defined in subparagraph (E))''
and inserting ``a hospital that is an applicable
hospital (as defined in subparagraph (E)) or is a high
Medicaid facility described in subparagraph (F)'';

[[Page 1050]]

(B) in subparagraph (C)(iii), by inserting after
``date of enactment of this subsection'' the following:
``(or, in the case of a hospital that did not have a
provider agreement in effect as of such date but does
have such an agreement in effect on December 31, 2010,
the effective date of such provider agreement)'';
(C) by redesignating subparagraphs (F) through (H)
as subparagraphs (G) through (I), respectively; and
(D) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the
following new subparagraph:
``(F) High medicaid facility described.--A high
Medicaid facility described in this subparagraph is a
hospital that--
``(i) is not the sole hospital in a county;
``(ii) with respect to each of the 3 most
recent years for which data are available, has an
annual percent of total inpatient admissions that
represent inpatient admissions under title XIX
that is estimated to be greater than such percent
with respect to such admissions for any other
hospital located in the county in which the
hospital is located; and
``(iii) meets the conditions described in
subparagraph (E)(iii).''.
SEC. 1107. PAYMENT FOR IMAGING SERVICES.

Section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as
amended by section 3135(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act, is amended--
(1) in subsection (b)(4)--
(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``this
paragraph'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)''; and
(B) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows:
``(C) Adjustment in imaging utilization rate.--With
respect to fee schedules established for 2011 and
subsequent years, in the methodology for determining
practice expense relative value units for expensive
diagnostic imaging equipment under the final rule
published by the Secretary in the Federal Register on
November 25, 2009 (42 CFR 410 et al.), the Secretary
shall use a 75 percent assumption instead of the
utilization rates otherwise established in such final
rule.''; and
(2) in subsection (c)(2)(B)(v), by striking subclauses
(III), (IV), and (V) and inserting the following new subclause:
``(III) Change in utilization rate
for certain imaging
services. <> --
Effective for fee schedules established
beginning with 2011, reduced
expenditures attributable to the change
in the utilization rate applicable to
2011, as described in subsection
(b)(4)(C).''.
SEC. 1108. <> PE GPCI ADJUSTMENT FOR
2010.

<> Effective as if included in the enactment
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, section
1848(e)(1)(H)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
4(e)(1)(H)(i)), as added by section 3102(b)(2) of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, is amended by striking ``\3/4\'' and inserting
``\1/2\''.

[[Page 1051]]

SEC. 1109. <> PAYMENT FOR QUALIFYING
HOSPITALS.

(a) In General.--From the amount available under subsection (b), the
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for a payment to
qualifying hospitals (as defined in subsection (d)) for fiscal years
2011 and 2012 of the amount determined under subsection (c).
(b) Amounts Available.--There shall be available from the Federal
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund $400,000,000 for payments under this
section for fiscal years 2011 and 2012.
(c) Payment Amount.--The amount of payment under this section for a
qualifying hospital shall be determined, in a manner consistent with the
amount available under subsection (b), in proportion to the portion of
the amount of the aggregate payments under section 1886(d) of the Social
Security Act to the hospital for fiscal year 2009 bears to the sum of
all such payments to all qualifying hospitals for such fiscal year.
(d) Qualifying Hospital Defined.--In this section, the term
``qualifying hospital'' means a subsection (d) hospital (as defined for
purposes of section 1886(d) of the Social Security Act) that is located
in a county that ranks, based upon its ranking in age, sex, and race
adjusted spending for benefits under parts A and B under title XVIII of
such Act per enrollee, within the lowest quartile of such counties in
the United States.

Subtitle C--Medicaid

SEC. 1201. FEDERAL FUNDING FOR STATES.

Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as
amended by sections 2001(a)(3) and 10201(c) of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(1) in subsection (y)--
(A) by redesignating subclause (II) of paragraph
(1)(B)(ii) as paragraph (5) of subsection (z) and
realigning the left margins accordingly; and
(B) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the
following:
``(1) Amount of increase.--Notwithstanding subsection (b),
the Federal medical assistance percentage for a State that is
one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia, with respect
to amounts expended by such State for medical assistance for
newly eligible individuals described in subclause (VIII) of
section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), shall be equal to--
``(A) 100 percent for calendar quarters in 2014,
2015, and 2016;
``(B) 95 percent for calendar quarters in 2017;
``(C) 94 percent for calendar quarters in 2018;
``(D) 93 percent for calendar quarters in 2019; and
``(E) 90 percent for calendar quarters in 2020 and
each year thereafter.''; and
(2) in subsection (z)--
(A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``September 30,
2019'' and inserting ``December 31, 2015'' and by
striking ``subsection (y)(1)(B)(ii)(II)'' and inserting
``paragraph (3)'';
(B) by striking paragraphs (2) through (4) and
inserting the following:

[[Page 1052]]

``(2)(A) For calendar quarters in 2014 and each year
thereafter, the Federal medical assistance percentage otherwise
determined under subsection (b) for an expansion State described
in paragraph (3) with respect to medical assistance for
individuals described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) who are
nonpregnant childless adults with respect to whom the State may
require enrollment in benchmark coverage under section 1937
shall be equal to the percent specified in subparagraph (B)(i)
for such year.
``(B)(i) The percent specified in this subparagraph for a
State for a year is equal to the Federal medical assistance
percentage (as defined in the first sentence of subsection (b))
for the State increased by a number of percentage points equal
to the transition percentage (specified in clause (ii) for the
year) of the number of percentage points by which--
``(I) such Federal medical assistance percentage for
the State, is less than
``(II) the percent specified in subsection (y)(1)
for the year.
``(ii) The transition percentage specified in this clause
for--
``(I) 2014 is 50 percent;
``(II) 2015 is 60 percent;
``(III) 2016 is 70 percent;
``(IV) 2017 is 80 percent;
``(V) 2018 is 90 percent; and
``(VI) 2019 and each subsequent year is 100
percent.''; and
(C) by redesignating paragraph (5) (as added by
paragraph (1)(A) of this section) as paragraph (3),
realigning the left margins to align with paragraph (2),
and striking the heading and all that follows through
``a State is'' and inserting ``A State is''.
SEC. 1202. PAYMENTS TO PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIANS.

(a) In General.--
(1) Fee-for-service payments.--Section 1902 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 2303(a)(2)
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(A) in subsection (a)(13)--
(i) by striking ``and'' at the end of
subparagraph (A);
(ii) by adding ``and'' at the end of
subparagraph (B); and
(iii) by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
``(C) payment for primary care services (as defined
in subsection (jj)) furnished in 2013 and 2014 by a
physician with a primary specialty designation of family
medicine, general internal medicine, or pediatric
medicine at a rate not less than 100 percent of the
payment rate that applies to such services and physician
under part B of title XVIII (or, if greater, the payment
rate that would be applicable under such part if the
conversion factor under section 1848(d) for the year
involved were the conversion factor under such section
for 2009);''; and
(B) by adding at the end the following new
subsection:

[[Page 1053]]

``(jj) Primary Care Services Defined.--For purposes of subsection
(a)(13)(C), the term `primary care services' means--
``(1) evaluation and management services that are procedure
codes (for services covered under title XVIII) for services in
the category designated Evaluation and Management in the
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (established by the
Secretary under section 1848(c)(5) as of December 31, 2009, and
as subsequently modified); and
``(2) services related to immunization administration for
vaccines and toxoids for which CPT codes 90465, 90466, 90467,
90468, 90471, 90472, 90473, or 90474 (as subsequently modified)
apply under such System.''.
(2) Under medicaid managed care plans.--Section 1932(f) of
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-2(f)) is amended--
(A) in the heading, by adding at the end the
following: ``; Adequacy of Payment for Primary Care
Services''; and
(B) by inserting before the period at the end the
following: ``and, in the case of primary care services
described in section 1902(a)(13)(C), consistent with the
minimum payment rates specified in such section
(regardless of the manner in which such payments are
made, including in the form of capitation or partial
capitation)''.

(b) Increase in Payment Using Increased FMAP.--Section 1905 of the
Social Security Act, as amended by section 1004(b) of this Act and
section 10201(c)(6) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
``(dd) Increased FMAP for Additional Expenditures for Primary Care
Services.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), with respect to the portion
of the amounts expended for medical assistance for services described in
section 1902(a)(13)(C) furnished on or after January 1, 2013, and before
January 1, 2015, that is attributable to the amount by which the minimum
payment rate required under such section (or, by application, section
1932(f)) exceeds the payment rate applicable to such services under the
State plan as of July 1, 2009, the Federal medical assistance percentage
for a State that is one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia
shall be equal to 100 percent. The preceding sentence does not prohibit
the payment of Federal financial participation based on the Federal
medical assistance percentage for amounts in excess of those specified
in such sentence.''.
SEC. 1203. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL PAYMENTS.

(a) In General.--Section 1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)), as amended by sections 2551(a)(4) and 10201(e)(1) of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (6)(B)(iii), in the matter preceding
subclause (I), by striking ``or paragraph (7)''; and
(2) by striking paragraph (7) and inserting the following:
``(7) Medicaid dsh reductions.--
``(A) Reductions.--
``(i) In general.--For each of fiscal years
2014 through 2020 the Secretary shall effect the
following reductions:

[[Page 1054]]

``(I) Reduction in dsh allotments.--
The Secretary shall reduce DSH
allotments to States in the amount
specified under the DSH health reform
methodology under subparagraph (B) for
the State for the fiscal year.
``(II) Reductions in payments.--The
Secretary shall reduce payments to
States under section 1903(a) for each
calendar quarter in the fiscal year, in
the manner specified in clause (iii), in
an amount equal to \1/4\ of the DSH
allotment reduction under subclause (I)
for the State for the fiscal year.
``(ii) Aggregate reductions.--The aggregate
reductions in DSH allotments for all States under
clause (i)(I) shall be equal to--
``(I) $500,000,000 for fiscal year
2014;
``(II) $600,000,000 for fiscal year
2015;
``(III) $600,000,000 for fiscal year
2016;
``(IV) $1,800,000,000 for fiscal
year 2017;
``(V) $5,000,000,000 for fiscal year
2018;
``(VI) $5,600,000,000 for fiscal
year 2019; and
``(VII) $4,000,000,000 for fiscal
year 2020.
The Secretary shall distribute such aggregate
reductions among States in accordance with
subparagraph (B).
``(iii) Manner of payment reduction.--The
amount of the payment reduction under clause
(i)(II) for a State for a quarter shall be deemed
an overpayment to the State under this title to be
disallowed against the State's regular quarterly
draw for all spending under section 1903(d)(2).
Such a disallowance is not subject to a
reconsideration under subsections (d) and (e) of
section 1116.
``(iv) Definition.--In this paragraph, the
term `State' means the 50 States and the District
of Columbia.
``(B) DSH health reform methodology.--The Secretary
shall carry out subparagraph (A) through use of a DSH
Health Reform methodology that meets the following
requirements:
``(i) The methodology imposes the largest
percentage reductions on the States that--
``(I) have the lowest percentages of
uninsured individuals (determined on the
basis of data from the Bureau of the
Census, audited hospital cost reports,
and other information likely to yield
accurate data) during the most recent
year for which such data are available;
or
``(II) do not target their DSH
payments on--
``(aa) hospitals with high
volumes of Medicaid inpatients
(as defined in subsection
(b)(1)(A)); and
``(bb) hospitals that have
high levels of uncompensated
care (excluding bad debt).
``(ii) The methodology imposes a smaller
percentage reduction on low DSH States described
in paragraph (5)(B).

[[Page 1055]]

``(iii) The methodology takes into account the
extent to which the DSH allotment for a State was
included in the budget neutrality calculation for
a coverage expansion approved under section 1115
as of July 31, 2009.''.

(b) Extension of DSH Allotment.--Section 1923(f)(6)(A) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(6)(A)) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
``(v) Allotment for 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters
of fiscal year 2012 and for fiscal year 2013.--
Notwithstanding the table set forth in paragraph
(2):
``(I) 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters of
fiscal year 2012.--In the case of a
State that has a DSH allotment of $0 for
the 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters of fiscal
year 2012, the DSH allotment shall be
$47,200,000 for such quarters.
``(II) Fiscal year 2013.--In the
case of a State that has a DSH allotment
of $0 for fiscal year 2013, the DSH
allotment shall be $53,100,000 for such
fiscal year.''.
SEC. 1204. FUNDING FOR THE TERRITORIES.

(a) In General.--Part III of subtitle D of title I of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by section 10104(m) of
such Act, is amended by inserting after section 1322 the following
section:
``SEC. 1323. <> FUNDING FOR THE TERRITORIES.

``(a) In General.--A territory that--
``(1) elects consistent with subsection (b) to establish an
Exchange in accordance with part II of this subtitle and
establishes such an Exchange in accordance with such part shall
be treated as a State for purposes of such part and shall be
entitled to payment from the amount allocated to the territory
under subsection (c); or
``(2) does not make such election shall be entitled to an
increase in the dollar limitation applicable to the territory
under subsections (f) and (g) of section 1108 of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308) for such period in such amount for
such territory and such increase shall not be taken into account
in computing any other amount under such subsections.

``(b) Terms and Conditions.--An election under subsection (a)(1)
shall--
``(1) <> not be effective unless the
election is consistent with section 1321 and is received not
later than October 1, 2013; and
``(2) <> be contingent upon entering into
an agreement between the territory and the Secretary that
requires that--
``(A) funds provided under the agreement shall be
used only to provide premium and cost-sharing assistance
to residents of the territory obtaining health insurance
coverage through the Exchange; and
``(B) the premium and cost-sharing assistance
provided under such agreement shall be structured in
such a manner so as to prevent any gap in assistance for
individuals between the income level at which medical
assistance is available through the territory's Medicaid
plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act and the
income level at

[[Page 1056]]

which premium and cost-sharing assistance is available
under the agreement.

``(c) Appropriation and Allocation.--
``(1) <> Appropriation.--Out of any
funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there is
appropriated for purposes of payment pursuant to subsection (a)
$1,000,000,000, to be available during the period beginning with
2014 and ending with 2019.
``(2) Allocation.--The Secretary shall allocate the amount
appropriated under paragraph (1) among the territories for
purposes of carrying out this section as follows:
``(A) For Puerto Rico, $925,000,000.
``(B) For another territory, the portion of
$75,000,000 specified by the Secretary.''.

(b) Medicaid Funding.--
(1) Increase in funding caps.--Section 1108(g) of the Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)), as amended by section 2005(a)
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(A) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and section
1323(a)(2) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act'' after ``subject to''; and
(B) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the
following:
``(5) Additional increase.-- <> The
Secretary shall increase the amounts otherwise determined under
this subsection for Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the
Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa (after the
application of subsection (f) and the preceding paragraphs of
this subsection) for the period beginning July 1, 2011, and
ending on September 30, 2019, by such amounts that the total
additional payments under title XIX to such territories equals
$6,300,000,000 for such period. The Secretary shall increase
such amounts in proportion to the amounts applicable to such
territories under this subsection and subsection (f) on the date
of enactment of this paragraph.''.
(2) Disregard of payments; increased fmap.--Section 2005 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act <> is amended--
(A) <> by repealing subsection
(b) (and the amendments made by that subsection) and
section 1108(g)(4) of the Social Security Act shall be
applied as if such amendments had never been enacted;
and
(B) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``January''
and inserting ``July''.
SEC. 1205. DELAY IN COMMUNITY FIRST CHOICE OPTION.

Section 1915(k)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(k)),
as added by section 2401 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act, is amended by striking ``October 1, 2010'' and inserting ``October
1, 2011''.
SEC. 1206. DRUG REBATES FOR NEW FORMULATIONS OF EXISTING DRUGS.

(a) Treatment of New Formulations.--Subparagraph (C) of section
1927(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(2)), as
added by section 2501(d) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act, is amended to read as follows:

[[Page 1057]]

``(C) Treatment of new formulations.--In the case of
a drug that is a line extension of a single source drug
or an innovator multiple source drug that is an oral
solid dosage form, the rebate obligation with respect to
such drug under this section shall be the amount
computed under this section for such new drug or, if
greater, the product of--
``(i) the average manufacturer price of the
line extension of a single source drug or an
innovator multiple source drug that is an oral
solid dosage form;
``(ii) the highest additional rebate
(calculated as a percentage of average
manufacturer price) under this section for any
strength of the original single source drug or
innovator multiple source drug; and
``(iii) the total number of units of each
dosage form and strength of the line extension
product paid for under the State plan in the
rebate period (as reported by the State).
<> In this subparagraph, the term
`line extension' means, with respect to a drug, a new
formulation of the drug, such as an extended release
formulation.''.

(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendment
made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Subtitle D--Reducing Fraud, Waste, and Abuse

SEC. 1301. COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTERS.

(a) In General.--Section 1861(ff)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act
(42 U.S.C. 1395x(ff)(3)(B)) is amended--
(1) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
(2) by redesignating clause (iii) as clause (iv); and
(3) by inserting after clause (ii) the following:
``(iii) provides at least 40 percent of its services to
individuals who are not eligible for benefits under this title;
and''.

(b) Restriction.--Section 1861(ff)(3)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C.
1395x(ff)(3)(A)) is amended by inserting ``other than in an individual's
home or in an inpatient or residential setting'' before the period.
(c) <> Effective Date.--The
amendments made by this section shall apply to items and services
furnished on or after the first day of the first calendar quarter that
begins at least 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 1302. MEDICARE PREPAYMENT MEDICAL REVIEW LIMITATIONS.

Section 1874A(h) of the Social Security Act <> (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3a(h)) is repealed.
SEC. 1303. FUNDING TO FIGHT FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE.

(a) Funding to Fight Fraud, Waste, and Abuse.--
(1) In general.--Section 1817(k) of the Social Security Act
42 U.S.C. 1395i(k)), as amended by section 6402(i) of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is further amended--
(A) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:

[[Page 1058]]

``(8) Additional funding.--
``(A) In general.--In addition to the funds
otherwise appropriated to the Account from the Trust
Fund under paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A) and for purposes
described in paragraphs (3)(C) and (4)(A), there are
hereby appropriated to such Account from such Trust Fund
the following additional amounts:
``(i) For fiscal year 2011, $95,000,000.
``(ii) For fiscal year 2012, $55,000,000.
``(iii) For each of fiscal years 2013 and
2014, $30,000,000.
``(iv) For each of fiscal years 2015 and 2016,
$20,000,000.
``(B) Allocation.--The funds appropriated under this
paragraph shall be allocated in the same proportion as
the total funding appropriated with respect to
paragraphs (3)(A) and (4)(A) was allocated with respect
to fiscal year 2010, and shall be available without
further appropriation until expended.''; and
(B) in paragraph (4)(A), by inserting ``for
activities described in paragraph (3)(C) and'' after
``necessary''.

(b) Medicaid Integrity Program.--Section 1936(e)(1) of such Act (42
U.S.C. 1396-u6(e)(1)) <> is amended--
(1) in subparagraph (B), by striking at the end ``and'';
(2) in subparagraph (C)--
(A) by striking ``for each fiscal year thereafter''
and inserting ``for each of fiscal years 2009 and
2010''; and
(B) by striking the period and inserting ``; and'';
and
(3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
``(D) for each fiscal year after fiscal year 2010,
the amount appropriated under this paragraph for the
previous fiscal year, increased by the percentage
increase in the consumer price index for all urban
consumers (all items; United States city average) over
the previous year.''.
SEC. 1304. 90-DAY PERIOD OF ENHANCED OVERSIGHT FOR INITIAL CLAIMS
OF DME SUPPLIERS.

Section 1866(j), as amended by section 6401 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, <> is further
amended--
(1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (7) as
paragraphs (5) through (8), respectively; and
(2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new
paragraph:
``(4) 90-day period of enhanced oversight for initial claims
of dme suppliers. <> --For periods
beginning after January 1, 2011, if the Secretary determines
that there is a significant risk of fraudulent activity among
suppliers of durable medical equipment, in the case of a
supplier of durable medical equipment who is within a category
or geographic area under title XVIII identified pursuant to such
determination and who is initially enrolling under such title,
the Secretary shall, notwithstanding sections 1816(c), 1842(c),
and 1869(a)(2), withhold payment under such title with respect
to durable medical equipment furnished by such supplier during
the 90-day period beginning on the date of the first submission
of a claim under such title for durable medical equipment
furnished by such supplier.''.

[[Page 1059]]

Subtitle E--Provisions Relating to Revenue

SEC. 1401. HIGH-COST PLAN EXCISE TAX.

(a) In General.--Section 4980I of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as added by section 9001 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act and amended by section 10901 of such Act, is <>  amended--
(1) in subsection (b)(3)(B)--
(A) by striking ``The annual'' and inserting the
following:
``(i) In general.--Except as provided in
clause (ii), the annual''; and
(B) by adding at the end the following new clause:
``(ii) Multiemployer plan coverage.--Any
coverage provided under a multiemployer plan (as
defined in section 414(f)) shall be treated as
coverage other than self-only coverage.'';
(2) in subsection (b)(3)(C)--
(A) by striking ``Except as provided in subparagraph
(D)--'';
(B) in clause (i)--
(i) by striking ``2013'' each place it appears
in the heading and the text and inserting
``2018'';
(ii) by striking ``$8,500'' in subclause (I)
and inserting ``$10,200 multiplied by the health
cost adjustment percentage (determined by only
taking into account self-only coverage)''; and
(iii) by striking ``$23,000'' in subclause
(II) and inserting ``$27,500 multiplied by the
health cost adjustment percentage (determined by
only taking into account coverage other than self-
only coverage)'';
(C) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as
clauses (iv) and (v), respectively, and by inserting
after clause (i) the following new clauses:
``(ii) Health cost adjustment percentage.--For
purposes of clause (i), the health cost adjustment
percentage is equal to 100 percent plus the excess
(if any) of--
``(I) the percentage by which the
per employee cost for providing coverage
under the Blue Cross/Blue Shield
standard benefit option under the
Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan
for plan year 2018 (determined by using
the benefit package for such coverage in
2010) exceeds such cost for plan year
2010, over
``(II) 55 percent.
``(iii) Age and gender adjustment.--
``(I) In general.--The amount
determined under subclause (I) or (II)
of clause (i), whichever is applicable,
for any taxable period shall be
increased by the amount determined under
subclause (II).
``(II) Amount determined.--The
amount determined under this subclause
is an amount equal to the excess (if
any) of--

[[Page 1060]]

``(aa) the premium cost of
the Blue Cross/Blue Shield
standard benefit option under
the Federal Employees Health
Benefits Plan for the type of
coverage provided such
individual in such taxable
period if priced for the age and
gender characteristics of all
employees of the individual's
employer, over
``(bb) that premium cost for
the provision of such coverage
under such option in such
taxable period if priced for the
age and gender characteristics
of the national workforce.''.
(D) in clause (iv), as redesignated by subparagraph
(C)--
(i) by inserting ``covered by the plan'' after
``whose employees''; and
(ii) by striking subclauses (I) and (II) and
inserting the following:
``(I) the dollar amount in clause
(i)(I) shall be increased by $1,650, and
``(II) the dollar amount in clause
(i)(II) shall be increased by $3,450,'',
and
(E) in clause (v), as redesignated by subparagraph
(C)--
(i) by striking ``2013'' and inserting
``2018'';
(ii) by striking ``clauses (i) and (ii)'' and
inserting ``clauses (i) (after the application of
clause (ii)) and (iv)''; and
(iii) by inserting ``in the case of
determinations for calendar years beginning before
2020'' after ``1 percentage point'' in subclause
(II) thereof;
(3) by striking subparagraph (D) of subsection (b)(3);
(4) in subsection (d)(1)(B), by redesignating clause (ii) as
clause (iii) and by inserting after clause (i) the following new
clause:
``(ii) any coverage under a separate policy,
certificate, or contract of insurance which
provides benefits substantially all of which are
for treatment of the mouth (including any organ or
structure within the mouth) or for treatment of
the eye, or''; and
(5) in subsection (d), by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
``(3) Employee.--The term `employee' includes any former
employee, surviving spouse, or other primary insured
individual.''.

(b) Effective Dates.--
(1) Section 9001(c) of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act <> is amended by striking ``2012''
and inserting ``2017''.
(2) Section 10901(c) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act is <> amended by
striking ``2012'' and inserting ``2017''.
SEC. 1402. UNEARNED INCOME MEDICARE CONTRIBUTION.

(a) Investment Income.--
(1) In general.--Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 is amended by inserting after chapter 2 the following new
chapter:

[[Page 1061]]

``CHAPTER 2A--UNEARNED INCOME MEDICARE CONTRIBUTION

``Sec. 1411. Imposition of tax.

``SEC. 1411. <> IMPOSITION OF
TAX.

``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (e)--
``(1) Application to individuals.--In the case of an
individual, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any other
tax imposed by this subtitle) for each taxable year a tax equal
to 3.8 percent of the lesser of--
``(A) net investment income for such taxable year,
or
``(B) the excess (if any) of--
``(i) the modified adjusted gross income for
such taxable year, over
``(ii) the threshold amount.
``(2) Application to estates and trusts.--In the case of an
estate or trust, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any
other tax imposed by this subtitle) for each taxable year a tax
of 3.8 percent of the lesser of--
``(A) the undistributed net investment income for
such taxable year, or
``(B) the excess (if any) of--
``(i) the adjusted gross income (as defined in
section 67(e)) for such taxable year, over
``(ii) the dollar amount at which the highest
tax bracket in section 1(e) begins for such
taxable year.

``(b) Threshold Amount.--For purposes of this chapter, the term
`threshold amount' means--
``(1) in the case of a taxpayer making a joint return under
section 6013 or a surviving spouse (as defined in section 2(a)),
$250,000,
``(2) in the case of a married taxpayer (as defined in
section 7703) filing a separate return, \1/2\ of the dollar
amount determined under paragraph (1), and
``(3) in any other case, $200,000.

``(c) Net Investment Income.--For purposes of this chapter--
``(1) In general.--The term `net investment income' means
the excess (if any) of--
``(A) the sum of--
``(i) gross income from interest, dividends,
annuities, royalties, and rents, other than such
income which is derived in the ordinary course of
a trade or business not described in paragraph
(2),
``(ii) other gross income derived from a trade
or business described in paragraph (2), and
``(iii) net gain (to the extent taken into
account in computing taxable income) attributable
to the disposition of property other than property
held in a trade or business not described in
paragraph (2), over
``(B) the deductions allowed by this subtitle which
are properly allocable to such gross income or net gain.
``(2) Trades and businesses to which tax applies.--A trade
or business is described in this paragraph if such trade or
business is--
``(A) a passive activity (within the meaning of
section 469) with respect to the taxpayer, or

[[Page 1062]]

``(B) a trade or business of trading in financial
instruments or commodities (as defined in section
475(e)(2)).
``(3) Income on investment of working capital subject to
tax.-- <> A rule similar to the rule of
section 469(e)(1)(B) shall apply for purposes of this
subsection.
``(4) Exception for certain active interests in partnerships
and s corporations.--In the case of a disposition of an interest
in a partnership or S corporation--
``(A) gain from such disposition shall be taken into
account under clause (iii) of paragraph (1)(A) only to
the extent of the net gain which would be so taken into
account by the transferor if all property of the
partnership or S corporation were sold for fair market
value immediately before the disposition of such
interest, and
``(B) <> a rule similar to the
rule of subparagraph (A) shall apply to a loss from such
disposition.
``(5) Exception for distributions from qualified plans.--The
term `net investment income' shall not include any distribution
from a plan or arrangement described in section 401(a), 403(a),
403(b), 408, 408A, or 457(b).
``(6) Special rule.--Net investment income shall not include
any item taken into account in determining self-employment
income for such taxable year on which a tax is imposed by
section 1401(b).

``(d) Modified Adjusted Gross Income.--For purposes of this chapter,
the term `modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income
increased by the excess of--
``(1) the amount excluded from gross income under section
911(a)(1), over
``(2) the amount of any deductions (taken into account in
computing adjusted gross income) or exclusions disallowed under
section 911(d)(6) with respect to the amounts described in
paragraph (1).

``(e) Nonapplication of Section.--This section shall not apply to--
``(1) a nonresident alien, or
``(2) a trust all of the unexpired interests in which are
devoted to one or more of the purposes described in section
170(c)(2)(B).''.
(2) Estimated taxes.--Section 6654 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 <> is amended--
(A) in subsection (a), by striking ``and the tax
under chapter 2'' and inserting ``the tax under chapter
2, and the tax under chapter 2A''; and
(B) in subsection (f)--
(i) by striking ``minus'' at the end of
paragraph (2) and inserting ``plus''; and
(ii) by redesignating paragraph (3) as
paragraph (4) and inserting after paragraph (2)
the following new paragraph:
``(3) the taxes imposed by chapter 2A, minus''.
(3) Clerical amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle
A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
by inserting after the item relating to chapter 2 the following
new item:

[[Page 1063]]

``Chapter 2A--Unearned Income Medicare Contribution''.

(4) <> Effective dates.--The
amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years
beginning after December 31, 2012.

(b) Earned Income.--
(1) Threshold.--
(A) FICA.--Paragraph (2) of section 3101(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 9015
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and
amended by section 10906 of such Act, <> is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of
subparagraph (A), by redesignating subparagraph (B) as
subparagraph (C), and by inserting after subparagraph
(A) the following new subparagraph:
``(B) in the case of a married taxpayer (as defined
in section 7703) filing a separate return, \1/2\ of the
dollar amount determined under subparagraph (A), and''.
(B) SECA.--Section 1401(b)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 9015 of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended
by section 10906 of such Act, <> is
amended--
(i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and''
at the end of clause (i), by redesignating clause
(ii) as clause (iii), and by inserting after
clause (i) the following new clause:
``(ii) in the case of a married taxpayer (as
defined in section 7703) filing a separate return,
\1/2\ of the dollar amount determined under clause
(i), and''; and
(ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``under
clauses (i) and (ii)'' and inserting ``under
clause (i), (ii), or (iii) (whichever is
applicable)''.
(2) Estimated taxes.--Section 6654 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 <> is amended by redesignating
subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after
subsection (l) the following new subsection:

``(m) Special Rule for Medicare Tax.--For purposes of this section,
the tax imposed under section 3101(b)(2) (to the extent not withheld)
shall be treated as a tax imposed under chapter 2.''.
(3) <> Effective
date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with
respect to remuneration received, and taxable years beginning
after, December 31, 2012.
SEC. 1403. DELAY OF LIMITATION ON HEALTH FLEXIBLE SPENDING
ARRANGEMENTS UNDER CAFETERIA PLANS.

(a) In General.--Section 10902(b) of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act <> is amended by striking
``December 31, 2010'' and inserting ``December 31, 2012''.

(b) Inflation Adjustment.--Paragraph (2) of section 125(i) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 9005 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act and amended by section 10902 of such
Act, <> is amended--
(1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking
``December 31, 2011'' and inserting ``December 31, 2013''; and
(2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``2010'' and inserting
``2012''.

[[Page 1064]]

SEC. 1404. BRAND NAME PHARMACEUTICALS.

(a) In General.--Section 9008 of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care <> Act is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``2009'' and inserting
``2010'';
(2) in subsection (b)--
(A) by striking ``$2,300,000,000'' in paragraph (1)
and inserting ``the applicable amount''; and
(B) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
``(4) Applicable amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the
applicable amount shall be determined in accordance with the
following table:


``Calendar year                          Applicable amount
2011.................................  $2,500,000,000
2012.................................  $2,800,000,000
2013.................................  $2,800,000,000
2014.................................  $3,000,000,000
2015.................................  $3,000,000,000
2016.................................  $3,000,000,000
2017.................................  $4,000,000,000
2018.................................  $4,100,000,000
2019 and thereafter..................  $2,800,000,000.'';



(3) in subsection (d), by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
``(3) Joint and several liability.--If more than one person
is liable for payment of the fee under subsection (a) with
respect to a single covered entity by reason of the application
of paragraph (2), all such persons shall be jointly and
severally liable for payment of such fee.''; and
(4) by striking subsection (j) and inserting the following
new subsection:

``(j) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to calendar years
beginning after December 31, 2010.''.
(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendments
made by this section shall take effect as if included in section 9008 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
SEC. 1405. EXCISE TAX ON MEDICAL DEVICE MANUFACTURERS.

(a) In General.--Chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
amended--
(1) by inserting after subchapter D the following new
subchapter:

``Subchapter E--Medical Devices

``Sec. 4191. <> Medical devices.

``SEC. 4191. MEDICAL DEVICES.

``(a) In General.--There is hereby imposed on the sale of any
taxable medical device by the manufacturer, producer, or importer a tax
equal to 2.3 percent of the price for which so sold.
``(b) Taxable Medical Device.--For purposes of this section--
``(1) In general.-- <> The term `taxable
medical device' means any device (as defined in section 201(h)
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) intended for
humans.
``(2) Exemptions.--Such term shall not include--

[[Page 1065]]

``(A) eyeglasses,
``(B) contact lenses,
``(C) hearing aids, and
``(D) any other medical device determined by the
Secretary to be of a type which is generally purchased
by the general public at retail for individual use.'',
and
(2) by inserting after the item relating to subchapter D in
the table of subchapters for such chapter the following new
item:

``subchapter e. medical devices''.

(b) Certain Exemptions Not to Apply.--
(1) Section 4221(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
is <> amended by adding at the end the
following new sentence: ``In the case of the tax imposed by
section 4191, paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6) shall not
apply.''.
(2) Section 6416(b)(2) of such Code <> is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In the
case of the tax imposed by section 4191, subparagraphs (B), (C),
(D), and (E) shall not apply.''.

(c) <> Effective Date.--The amendments made
by this section shall apply to sales after December 31, 2012.

(d) Repeal of Section 9009 of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act.-- <> Section 9009 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by section 10904 of such
Act, <> is repealed effective as of the date
of enactment of that Act.
SEC. 1406. HEALTH INSURANCE PROVIDERS.

(a) In General.--Section 9010 of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, as amended by section 10905 of such Act,
is <> amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``2010'' and inserting
``2013'';
(2) in subsection (b)(2)--
(A) by striking ``For purposes of paragraph (1), the
net premiums'' and inserting ``For purposes of paragraph
(1)--
``(A) In general.--The net premiums''; and
(B) by adding at the end the following subparagraph:
``(B) Partial exclusion for certain exempt
activities.--After the application of subparagraph (A),
only 50 percent of the remaining net premiums written
with respect to health insurance for any United States
health risk that are attributable to the activities
(other than activities of an unrelated trade or business
as defined in section 513 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986) of any covered entity qualifying under
paragraph (3), (4), (26), or (29) of section 501(c) of
such Code and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of
such Code shall be taken into account.'';
(3) in subsection (c)--
(A) by inserting ``during the calendar year in which
the fee under this section is due'' in paragraph (1)
after ``risk'';
(B) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraphs (C),
(D), and (E) and inserting the following new
subparagraphs:
``(C) any entity--

[[Page 1066]]

``(i) which is incorporated as a nonprofit
corporation under a State law,
``(ii) no part of the net earnings of which
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder
or individual, no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or
otherwise attempting, to influence legislation
(except as otherwise provided in section 501(h) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), and which does
not participate in, or intervene in (including the
publishing or distributing of statements), any
political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition
to) any candidate for public office, and
``(iii) more than 80 percent of the gross
revenues of which is received from government
programs that target low-income, elderly, or
disabled populations under titles XVIII, XIX, and
XXI of the Social Security Act, and
``(D) any entity which is described in section
501(c)(9) of such Code and which is established by an
entity (other than by an employer or employers) for
purposes of providing health care benefits.'';
(C) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``subparagraph
(C)(i)(I), (D)(i)(I), or (E)(i)'' and inserting
``subparagraph (C) or (D)''; and
(D) by adding at the end the following new
paragraph:
``(4) Joint and several liability.--If more than one person
is liable for payment of the fee under subsection (a) with
respect to a single covered entity by reason of the application
of paragraph (3), all such persons shall be jointly and
severally liable for payment of such fee.'';
(4) by striking subsection (e) and inserting the following:

``(e) Applicable Amount.--For purposes of subsection (b)(1)--
``(1) Years before 2019.-- <> In the
case of calendar years beginning before 2019, the applicable
amount shall be determined in accordance with the following
table:


``Calendar year                          Applicable amount
2014.................................  $8,000,000,000
2015.................................  $11,300,000,000
2016.................................  $11,300,000,000
2017.................................  $13,900,000,000
2018.................................  $14,300,000,000.



``(2) Years after 2018.--In the case of any calendar year
beginning after 2018, the applicable amount shall be the
applicable amount for the preceding calendar year increased by
the rate of premium growth (within the meaning of section
36B(b)(3)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) for such
preceding calendar year.'';
(5) in subsection (g), by adding at the end the following
new paragraphs:
``(3) Accuracy-related penalty.--
``(A) In general.--In the case of any understatement
of a covered entity's net premiums written with respect
to health insurance for any United States health risk
for any calendar year, there shall be paid by the
covered entity making such understatement, an amount
equal to the excess of--

[[Page 1067]]

``(i) the amount of the covered entity's fee
under this section for the calendar year the
Secretary determines should have been paid in the
absence of any such understatement, over
``(ii) the amount of such fee the Secretary
determined based on such understatement.
``(B) Understatement.--For purposes of this
paragraph, an understatement of a covered entity's net
premiums written with respect to health insurance for
any United States health risk for any calendar year is
the difference between the amount of such net premiums
written as reported on the return filed by the covered
entity under paragraph (1) and the amount of such net
premiums written that should have been reported on such
return.
``(C) Treatment of penalty.--The penalty imposed
under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the
provisions of subtitle F of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 that apply to assessable penalties imposed under
chapter 68 of such Code.
``(4) Treatment of information.--Section 6103 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not apply to any information
reported under this subsection.''; and
(6) by striking subsection (j) and inserting the following
new subsection:

``(j) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to calendar years
beginning after December 31, 2013.''.
(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendments
made by this section shall take effect as if included in section 9010 of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
SEC. 1407. DELAY OF ELIMINATION OF DEDUCTION FOR EXPENSES
ALLOCABLE TO MEDICARE PART D SUBSIDY.

Section 9012(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act <> is amended by striking ``2010'' and
inserting ``2012''.
SEC. 1408. ELIMINATION OF UNINTENDED APPLICATION OF CELLULOSIC
BIOFUEL PRODUCER CREDIT.

(a) In General.--Section 40(b)(6)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 <> is amended by adding at the end the following
new clause:
``(iii) Exclusion of unprocessed fuels.--The
term `cellulosic biofuel' shall not include any
fuel if--
``(I) more than 4 percent of such
fuel (determined by weight) is any
combination of water and sediment, or
``(II) the ash content of such fuel
is more than 1 percent (determined by
weight).''.

(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendment made by
this section shall apply to fuels sold or used on or after January 1,
2010.
SEC. 1409. CODIFICATION OF ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE DOCTRINE AND
PENALTIES.

(a) In General.-- <> Section 7701 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (o)
as subsection (p) and by inserting after subsection (n) the following
new subsection:

``(o) Clarification of Economic Substance Doctrine.--

[[Page 1068]]

``(1) Application of doctrine.--In the case of any
transaction to which the economic substance doctrine is
relevant, such transaction shall be treated as having economic
substance only if--
``(A) the transaction changes in a meaningful way
(apart from Federal income tax effects) the taxpayer's
economic position, and
``(B) the taxpayer has a substantial purpose (apart
from Federal income tax effects) for entering into such
transaction.
``(2) Special rule where taxpayer relies on profit
potential.--
``(A) In general.--The potential for profit of a
transaction shall be taken into account in determining
whether the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
paragraph (1) are met with respect to the transaction
only if the present value of the reasonably expected
pre-tax profit from the transaction is substantial in
relation to the present value of the expected net tax
benefits that would be allowed if the transaction were
respected.
``(B) Treatment of fees and foreign taxes.--Fees and
other transaction expenses shall be taken into account
as expenses in determining pre-tax profit under
subparagraph (A). <> The Secretary
shall issue regulations requiring foreign taxes to be
treated as expenses in determining pre-tax profit in
appropriate cases.
``(3) State and local tax benefits.--For purposes of
paragraph (1), any State or local income tax effect which is
related to a Federal income tax effect shall be treated in the
same manner as a Federal income tax effect.
``(4) Financial accounting benefits.--For purposes of
paragraph (1)(B), achieving a financial accounting benefit shall
not be taken into account as a purpose for entering into a
transaction if the origin of such financial accounting benefit
is a reduction of Federal income tax.
``(5) Definitions and special rules.--For purposes of this
subsection--
``(A) Economic substance doctrine.--The term
`economic substance doctrine' means the common law
doctrine under which tax benefits under subtitle A with
respect to a transaction are not allowable if the
transaction does not have economic substance or lacks a
business purpose.
``(B) Exception for personal transactions of
individuals.-- <> In the case of
an individual, paragraph (1) shall apply only to
transactions entered into in connection with a trade or
business or an activity engaged in for the production of
income.
``(C) Determination of application of doctrine not
affected.--The determination of whether the economic
substance doctrine is relevant to a transaction shall be
made in the same manner as if this subsection had never
been enacted.
``(D) Transaction.--The term `transaction' includes
a series of transactions.''.

(b) Penalty for Underpayments Attributable to Transactions Lacking
Economic Substance.--

[[Page 1069]]

(1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 6662 <> is amended by inserting after paragraph (5) the
following new paragraph:
``(6) Any disallowance of claimed tax benefits by reason of
a transaction lacking economic substance (within the meaning of
section 7701(o)) or failing to meet the requirements of any
similar rule of law.''.
(2) Increased penalty for nondisclosed transactions.--
Section 6662 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subsection:

``(i) Increase in Penalty in Case of Nondisclosed Noneconomic
Substance Transactions.--
``(1) In general.-- <> In the case of
any portion of an underpayment which is attributable to one or
more nondisclosed noneconomic substance transactions, subsection
(a) shall be applied with respect to such portion by
substituting `40 percent' for `20 percent'.
``(2) Nondisclosed noneconomic substance transactions.--
<> For purposes of this subsection, the term
`nondisclosed noneconomic substance transaction' means any
portion of a transaction described in subsection (b)(6) with
respect to which the relevant facts affecting the tax treatment
are not adequately disclosed in the return nor in a statement
attached to the return.
``(3) Special rule for amended returns.--In no event shall
any amendment or supplement to a return of tax be taken into
account for purposes of this subsection if the amendment or
supplement is filed after the earlier of the date the taxpayer
is first contacted by the Secretary regarding the examination of
the return or such other date as is specified by the
Secretary.''.
(3) Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (B) of section
6662A(e)(2) <> is amended--
(A) by striking ``section 6662(h)'' and inserting
``subsections (h) or (i) of section 6662''; and
(B) by striking ``gross valuation misstatement
penalty'' in the heading and inserting ``certain
increased underpayment penalties''.

(c) Reasonable Cause Exception Not Applicable to Noneconomic
Substance Transactions.--
(1) Reasonable cause exception for underpayments.--
Subsection (c) of section 6664 <> is
amended--
(A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as
paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively;
(B) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' in paragraph
(4)(A), as so redesignated, and inserting ``paragraph
(3)''; and
(C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following
new paragraph:
``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any
portion of an underpayment which is attributable to one or more
transactions described in section 6662(b)(6).''.
(2) Reasonable cause exception for reportable transaction
understatements.--Subsection (d) of section 6664 is amended--
(A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as
paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively;
(B) by striking ``paragraph (2)(C)'' in paragraph
(4), as so redesignated, and inserting ``paragraph
(3)(C)''; and

[[Page 1070]]

(C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following
new paragraph:
``(2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any
portion of a reportable transaction understatement which is
attributable to one or more transactions described in section
6662(b)(6).''.

(d) Application of Penalty for Erroneous Claim for Refund or Credit
to Noneconomic Substance Transactions.--Section 6676 <> is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and
inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:

``(c) Noneconomic Substance Transactions Treated as Lacking
Reasonable Basis.--For purposes of this section, any excessive amount
which is attributable to any transaction described in section 6662(b)(6)
shall not be treated as having a reasonable basis.''.
(e) <> Effective Date.--
(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of
this Act.
(2) Underpayments.--The amendments made by subsections (b)
and (c)(1) shall apply to underpayments attributable to
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of
this Act.
(3) Understatements.--The amendments made by subsection
(c)(2) shall apply to understatements attributable to
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of
this Act.
(4) Refunds and credits.--The amendment made by subsection
(d) shall apply to refunds and credits attributable to
transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of
this Act.
SEC. 1410. <> TIME FOR PAYMENT OF
CORPORATE ESTIMATED TAXES.

The percentage under paragraph (1) of section 202(b) of the
Corporate Estimated Tax Shift Act of 2009 in effect on the date of the
enactment of this Act is increased by 15.75 percentage points.

Subtitle F--Other Provisions

SEC. 1501. COMMUNITY COLLEGE AND CAREER TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.

Section 279(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2372a(b)) is
amended by striking ``Supplement'' and all that follows through
``Funds'' and inserting ``There are'' and by striking ``pursuant'' and
all that follows and inserting ``$500,000,000 for each of fiscal years
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 to carry out this subchapter, except that the
limitations contained in section 278(a)(2) shall not apply to such funds
and each State shall receive not less than 0.5 percent of the amount
appropriated pursuant to this subsection for each such fiscal year.''.

[[Page 1071]]

TITLE II--EDUCATION AND HEALTH

Subtitle A-- <> Education
SEC. 2001. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES.

(a) <> Short Title.--This subtitle may be
cited as the ``SAFRA Act''.

(b) References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in
this subtitle an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an
amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference
shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.).

PART I--INVESTING IN STUDENTS AND FAMILIES

SEC. 2101. FEDERAL PELL GRANTS.

(a) Amount of Grants.--Section 401(b) (20 U.S.C. 1070a(b)) is
amended--
(1) by amending paragraph (2)(A) to read as follows:
``(A) The amount of the Federal Pell Grant for a
student eligible under this part shall be--
``(i) the maximum Federal Pell Grant, as
specified in the last enacted appropriation Act
applicable to that award year, plus
``(ii) the amount of the increase calculated
under paragraph (8)(B) for that year, less
``(iii) an amount equal to the amount
determined to be the expected family contribution
with respect to that student for that year.''; and
(2) in paragraph (8)--
(A) in subparagraph (A)--
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ``, to carry out subparagraph (B) of this
paragraph''; and
(ii) by striking clauses (iii) through (x) and
inserting the following:
``(iii) to carry out subparagraph (B) of this
paragraph, such sums as may be necessary for
fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year
to provide the amount of increase of the maximum
Federal Pell Grant required by clauses (ii) and
(iii) of subparagraph (B); and
``(iv) to carry out this section,
$13,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2011.'';
(B) in subparagraph (B)--
(i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by
striking ``subparagraph (A)'' and inserting
``clauses (i) through (iii) of subparagraph (A)'';
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking ``and 2011-
2012'' and inserting ``, 2011-2012, and 2012-
2013''; and
(iii) by striking clause (iii) and inserting
the following:

[[Page 1072]]

``(iii) the amount determined under
subparagraph (C) for each succeeding award
year.''; and
(C) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:
``(C) Adjustment amounts.--
``(i) Award year 2013-2014.--For award year
2013-2014, the amount determined under this
subparagraph for purposes of subparagraph (B)(iii)
shall be equal to--
``(I) $5,550 or the total maximum
Federal Pell Grant for the preceding
award year (as determined under clause
(v)(II)), whichever is greater,
increased by a percentage equal to the
annual adjustment percentage for award
year 2013-2014, reduced by
``(II) $4,860 or the maximum Federal
Pell Grant for which a student was
eligible for the preceding award year,
as specified in the last enacted
appropriation Act applicable to that
year, whichever is greater; and
``(III) rounded to the nearest $5.
``(ii) Award years 2014-2015 through 2017-
2018.--For each of the award years 2014-2015
through 2017-2018, the amount determined under
this subparagraph for purposes of subparagraph
(B)(iii) shall be equal to--
``(I) the total maximum Federal Pell
Grant for the preceding award year (as
determined under clause (v)(II)),
increased by a percentage equal to the
annual adjustment percentage for the
award year for which the amount under
this subparagraph is being determined,
reduced by
``(II) $4,860 or the maximum Federal
Pell Grant for which a student was
eligible for the preceding award year,
as specified in the last enacted
appropriation Act applicable to that
year, whichever is greater; and
``(III) rounded to the nearest $5.
``(iii) Subsequent award years.--For award
year 2018-2019 and each subsequent award year, the
amount determined under this subparagraph for
purposes of subparagraph (B)(iii) shall be equal
to the amount determined under clause (ii) for
award year 2017-2018.
``(iv) Definitions.--For purposes of this
subparagraph--
``(I) the term `annual adjustment
percentage' as applied to an award year,
is equal to the estimated percentage
change in the Consumer Price Index (as
determined by the Secretary, using the
definition in section 478(f)) for the
most recent calendar year ending prior
to the beginning of that award year; and
``(II) the term `total maximum
Federal Pell Grant' as applied to a
preceding award year, is equal to the
sum of--

[[Page 1073]]

``(aa) the maximum Federal
Pell Grant for which a student
is eligible during an award
year, as specified in the last
enacted appropriation Act
applicable to that preceding
award year; and
``(bb) the amount of the
increase in the maximum Federal
Pell Grant required by this
paragraph for that preceding
award year.''.

(b) Conforming Amendments.--Title IV (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.) is
further amended--
(1) in section 401(b) (20 U.S.C. 1070a(b))--
(A) in paragraph (4)--
(i) by striking ``maximum basic grant level
specified in the appropriate appropriation Act''
and inserting ``maximum amount of a Federal Pell
Grant award determined under paragraph (2)(A)'';
and
(ii) by striking ``such level'' each place it
appears and inserting ``such Federal Pell Grant
amount'' in each such place; and
(B) in paragraph (6), by striking ``the grant level
specified in the appropriate Appropriation Act for this
subpart for such year'' and inserting ``the maximum
amount of a Federal Pell Grant award determined under
paragraph (2)(A), for which a student is eligible during
such award year'';
(2) in section 402D(d)(1) (20 U.S.C. 1070a-14(d)(1)), by
striking ``exceed the maximum'' and all that follows through
``Grant, for'' and inserting ``exceed the Federal Pell Grant
amount, determined under section 401(b)(2)(A), for which a
student is eligible, or be less than the minimum Federal Pell
Grant amount described in section 401(b)(4), for'';
(3) in section 435(a)(5)(A)(i)(I) (20 U.S.C.
1085(a)(5)(A)(i)(I)), by striking ``one-half the maximum Federal
Pell Grant award for which a student would be eligible'' and
inserting ``one-half the Federal Pell Grant amount, determined
under section 401(b)(2)(A), for which a student would be
eligible'';
(4) in section 483(e)(3)(A)(ii) (20 U.S.C.
1090(e)(3)(A)(ii)), by striking ``based on the maximum Federal
Pell Grant award at the time of application'' and inserting
``based on the Federal Pell Grant amount, determined under
section 401(b)(2)(A), for which a student is eligible at the
time of application'';
(5) in section 485E(b)(1)(A) (20 U.S.C. 1092f(b)(1)(A)), by
striking ``of such students' potential eligibility for a maximum
Federal Pell Grant under subpart 1 of part A'' and inserting
``of such students' potential eligibility for the Federal Pell
Grant amount, determined under section 401(b)(2)(A), for which
the student would be eligible''; and
(6) in section 894(f)(2)(C)(ii)(I) (20 U.S.C.
1161y(f)(2)(C)(ii)(I)), by striking ``the maximum Federal Pell
Grant for each award year'' and inserting ``the Federal Pell
Grant amount, determined under section 401(b)(2)(A), for which a
student may be eligible for each award year''.

(c) <> Effective Date.--The amendments
made by subsections (a) and (b) shall take effect on July 1, 2010.
SEC. 2102. COLLEGE ACCESS CHALLENGE GRANT PROGRAM.

Section 781 (20 U.S.C. 1141) is amended--

[[Page 1074]]

(1) in the first sentence of subsection (a), by striking
``$66,000,000'' and all that follows through the period and
inserting ``$150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010
through 2014. The authority to award grants under this section
shall expire at the end of fiscal year 2014.''; and
(2) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``0.5 percent'' and
inserting ``1.0 percent''.
SEC. 2103. INVESTMENT IN HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES AND MINORITY-SERVING
INSTITUTIONS.

Section 371(b)(1)(A) (20 U.S.C. 1067q(b)(1)(A)) is amended by
striking ``and 2009.'' and all that follows and inserting ``through
2019. <> The authority to award grants under
this section shall expire at the end of fiscal year 2019.''.

PART II--STUDENT LOAN REFORM

SEC. 2201. TERMINATION OF FEDERAL FAMILY EDUCATION LOAN
APPROPRIATIONS.

Section 421 (20 U.S.C. 1071) is amended--
(1) in subsection (b), in the first sentence of the matter
following paragraph (6), by inserting ``, except that no sums
may be expended after June 30, 2010, with respect to loans under
this part for which the first disbursement is after such date''
after ``expended''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(d) Termination of Authority to Make or Insure New Loans.--
Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (b) or any
other provision of law--
``(1) no new loans (including consolidation loans) may be
made or insured under this part after June 30, 2010; and
``(2) no funds are authorized to be appropriated, or may be
expended, under this Act or any other Act to make or insure
loans under this part (including consolidation loans) for which
the first disbursement is after June 30, 2010,

except as expressly authorized by an Act of Congress enacted after the
date of enactment of the SAFRA Act.''.
SEC. 2202. TERMINATION OF FEDERAL LOAN INSURANCE PROGRAM.

Section 424(a) (20 U.S.C. 1074(a)) is amended by striking
``September 30, 1976,'' and all that follows and inserting ``September
30, 1976, for each of the succeeding fiscal years ending prior to
October 1, 2009, and for the period from October 1, 2009, to June 30,
2010, for loans first disbursed on or before June 30, 2010.''.
SEC. 2203. TERMINATION OF APPLICABLE INTEREST RATES.

Section 427A(l) (20 U.S.C. 1077a(l)) is amended--
(1) in the subsection heading, by inserting ``and Before
July 1, 2010'' after ``2006'';
(2) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and before July 1,
2010,'' after ``July 1, 2006,'';
(3) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and before July 1,
2010,'' after ``July 1, 2006,'';
(4) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``and that was disbursed
before July 1, 2010,'' after ``July 1, 2006,''; and
(5) in paragraph (4)--
(A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by
striking ``July 1, 2012'' and inserting ``July 1,
2010''; and

[[Page 1075]]

(B) by repealing subparagraphs (D) and (E).
SEC. 2204. TERMINATION OF FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO REDUCE STUDENT
INTEREST COSTS.

(a) Higher Education Act of 1965.--Section 428 (20 U.S.C. 1078) is
amended--
(1) in subsection (a)--
(A) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding
subparagraph (A), by inserting ``for which the first
disbursement is made before July 1, 2010, and'' after
``eligible institution''; and
(B) in paragraph (5), by striking ``September 30,
2014,'' and all that follows through the period and
inserting ``June 30, 2010.'';
(2) in subsection (b)(1)--
(A) in subparagraph (G)(ii), by inserting ``and
before July 1, 2010,'' after ``July 1, 2006,''; and
(B) in subparagraph (H)(ii), by inserting ``and that
are first disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``July
1, 2006,'';
(3) in subsection (f)(1)(A)(ii)--
(A) by striking ``during fiscal years beginning'';
and
(B) by inserting ``and first disbursed before July
1, 2010,'' after ``October 1, 2003,''; and
(4) in subsection (j)(1), by inserting ``, before July 1,
2010,'' after ``section 435(d)(1)(D) of this Act shall''.

(b) College Cost Reduction and Access Act.--Section 303 of the
College Cost Reduction and Access Act (Public Law 110-84) <> is repealed.
SEC. 2205. TERMINATION OF FFEL PLUS LOANS.

Section 428B(a)(1) (20 U.S.C. 1078-2(a)(1)) is amended by striking
``A graduate'' and inserting ``Prior to July 1, 2010, a graduate''.
SEC. 2206. FEDERAL CONSOLIDATION LOANS.

(a) In General.--Section 428C (20 U.S.C. 1078-3) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(4)(A), by inserting ``, and first
disbursed before July 1, 2010'' after ``under this part'';
(2) in subsection (b)--
(A) in paragraph (1)(E), by inserting before the
semicolon ``, and before July 1, 2010''; and
(B) in paragraph (5), by striking ``In the event
that'' and inserting ``If, before July 1, 2010,'';
(3) in subsection (c)(1)--
(A) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by inserting ``and that
is disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``2006,''; and
(B) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``and
disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``1994,''; and
(4) in subsection (e), by striking ``September 30, 2014.''
and inserting ``June 30, 2010. No loan may be made under this
section for which the disbursement is on or after July 1,
2010.''.

(b) Temporary Loan Consolidation Authority.--Part D of title IV (20
U.S.C. 1087a et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 459A (20
U.S.C. 1087i) the following:

[[Page 1076]]

``SEC. 459B. <> TEMPORARY LOAN
CONSOLIDATION AUTHORITY.

``(a) Temporary Loan Consolidation Authority.--
``(1) In general.--A borrower who has 1 or more loans in 2
or more of the categories described in paragraph (2), and who
has not yet entered repayment on 1 or more of those loans in any
of the categories, may consolidate all of the loans of the
borrower that are described in paragraph (2) into a Federal
Direct Consolidation Loan during the period described in
paragraph (3).
``(2) Categories of loans that may be consolidated.--The
categories of loans that may be consolidated under paragraph (1)
are--
``(A) loans made under this part;
``(B) loans purchased by the Secretary pursuant to
section 459A; and
``(C) loans made under part B that are held by an
eligible lender, as such term is defined in section
435(d).
``(3) Time period in which loans may be consolidated.--The
Secretary may make a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan under
this section to a borrower whose application for such Federal
Direct Consolidation Loan is received on or after July 1, 2010,
and before July 1, 2011.

``(b) Terms of Loans.--A Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made
under this section shall have the same terms and conditions as a Federal
Direct Consolidation Loan made under section 455(g), except that--
``(1) <> in determining the applicable
rate of interest on the Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made
under this section (other than on a Federal Direct Consolidation
Loan described in paragraph (2)), section 427A(l)(3) shall be
applied without rounding the weighted average of the interest
rate on the loans consolidated to the nearest higher one-eighth
of 1 percent as described in subparagraph (A) of section
427A(l)(3); and
``(2) if a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made under this
section that repays a loan which is subject to an interest rate
determined under section 427A(g)(2), (j)(2), or (k)(2), then the
interest rate for such Federal Direct Consolidation Loan shall
be calculated--
``(A) by using the applicable rate of interest
described in section 427A(g)(2), (j)(2), or (k)(2),
respectively; and
``(B) in accordance with section 427A(l)(3).''.
SEC. 2207. TERMINATION OF UNSUBSIDIZED STAFFORD LOANS FOR MIDDLE-
INCOME BORROWERS.

Section 428H (20 U.S.C. 1078-8) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``that are first
disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``under this part'';
(2) in subsection (b)--
(A) by striking ``Any student'' and inserting
``Prior to July 1, 2010, any student''; and
(B) by inserting ``for which the first disbursement
is made before such date'' after ``unsubsidized Federal
Stafford Loan''; and
(3) in subsection (h), by inserting ``and that are first
disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``July 1, 2006,''.

[[Page 1077]]

SEC. 2208. TERMINATION OF SPECIAL ALLOWANCES.

Section 438 (20 U.S.C. 1087-1) is amended--
(1) in subsection (b)(2)(I)--
(A) in the subclause heading, by inserting ``, and
before july 1, 2010'' after ``2000'';
(B) in clause (i), by inserting ``and before July 1,
2010,'' after ``2000,'';
(C) in clause (ii)(II), by inserting ``and before
July 1, 2010,'' after ``2006,'';
(D) in clause (iii), by inserting ``and before July
1, 2010,'' after ``2000,'';
(E) in clause (iv), by inserting ``and that is
disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``2000,'';
(F) in clause (v)(I), by inserting ``and before July
1, 2010,'' after ``2006,''; and
(G) in clause (vi)--
(i) in the clause heading, by inserting ``,
and before july 1, 2010'' after ``2007''; and
(ii) in the matter preceding subclause (I), by
inserting ``and before July 1, 2010,'' after
``2007,'';
(2) in subsection (c)--
(A) in paragraph (2)(B)--
(i) in clause (iii), by inserting ``and''
after the semicolon;
(ii) in clause (iv), by striking ``; and'' and
inserting a period; and
(iii) by striking clause (v); and
(B) in paragraph (6), by inserting ``and first
disbursed before July 1, 2010,'' after ``1992,''; and
(3) in subsection (d)(2)(B), by inserting ``, and before
July 1, 2010'' after ``2007''.
SEC. 2209. ORIGINATION OF DIRECT LOANS AT INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE THE
UNITED STATES.

(a) Loans for Students Attending Institutions Outside the United
States.--Section 452 (20 U.S.C. 1087b) is amended by adding at the end
the following:
``(d) Institutions Outside the United States.--Loan funds for
students (and parents of students) attending institutions outside the
United States shall be disbursed through a financial institution located
or operating in the United States and designated by the Secretary to
serve as the agent of such institutions with respect to the receipt of
the disbursements of such loan funds and the transfer of such funds to
such institutions. To be eligible to receive funds under this part, an
institution outside the United States shall make arrangements with the
agent designated by the Secretary under this subsection to receive funds
under this part.''.
(b) Conforming Amendments.--
(1) Amendments.--Section 102 (20 U.S.C. 1002), as amended by
section 102 of the Higher Education Opportunity Act (Public Law
110-315) and section 101 of Public Law 111-39, is amended--
(A) by striking ``part B'' each place the term
appears and inserting ``part D'';
(B) in subsection (a)(1)(C), by inserting ``,
consistent with the requirements of section 452(d)''
before the period at the end; and

[[Page 1078]]

(C) in subsection (a)(2)(A)--
(i) in the second sentence of the matter
preceding clause (i), by striking ``made, insured,
or guaranteed'' and inserting ``made''; and
(ii) in clause (iii)--
(I) in subclause (III), by striking
``only Federal Stafford'' and all that
follows through ``section 428B'' and
inserting ``only Federal Direct Stafford
Loans under section 455(a)(2)(A),
Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford
Loans under section 455(a)(2)(D), or
Federal Direct PLUS Loans under section
455(a)(2)(B)''; and
(II) in subclause (V), by striking
``a Federal Stafford'' and all that
follows through ``section 428B'' and
inserting ``a Federal Direct Stafford
Loan under section 455(a)(2)(A), a
Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford
Loan under section 455(a)(2)(D), or a
Federal Direct PLUS Loan under section
455(a)(2)(B)''.
(2) <> Effective date.--The
amendments made by subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) shall be
effective on July 1, 2010, as if enacted as part of section
102(a)(1) of the Higher Education Opportunity Act (Public Law
110-315) and subject to section 102(e) of such Act as amended by
section 101(a)(2) of Public Law 111-39 (20 U.S.C. 1002 note).
SEC. 2210. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

(a) Amendments.--Section 454 (20 U.S.C. 1087d) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)--
(A) by striking paragraph (4); and
(B) by redesignating paragraphs (5) through (7) as
paragraphs (4) through (6), respectively; and
(2) in subsection (b)(2), by striking ``(5), (6), and (7)''
and inserting ``(5), and (6)''.

(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendments
made by subsection (a) shall take effect on July 1, 2010.
SEC. 2211. TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LOANS.

(a) In General.--Section 455 (20 U.S.C. 1087e) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting ``, and first
disbursed on June 30, 2010,'' before ``under sections 428''; and
(2) in subsection (g)--
(A) by inserting ``, including any loan made under
part B and first disbursed before July 1, 2010'' after
``section 428C(a)(4)''; and
(B) by striking the third sentence.

(b) <> Effective Date.--The amendment made by
subsection (a)(1) shall apply with respect to loans first disbursed
under part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.
1087a et seq.) on or after July 1, 2010.
SEC. 2212. CONTRACTS; MANDATORY FUNDS.

(a) Contracts.--Section 456 (20 U.S.C. 1087f) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)--
(A) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following
new paragraph:
``(4) Servicing by eligible not-for-profit servicers.--
``(A) Servicing contracts.--

[[Page 1079]]

``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall
contract with each eligible not-for-profit
servicer to service loans originated under this
part, if the servicer--
``(I) meets the standards for
servicing Federal assets that apply to
contracts awarded pursuant to paragraph
(1); and
``(II) has the capacity to service
the applicable loan volume allocation
described in subparagraph (B).
``(ii) Competitive market rate determination
for first 100,000 borrower accounts.--The
Secretary shall establish a separate pricing tier
for each of the first 100,000 borrower loan
accounts at a competitive market rate.
``(iii) Ineligibility.--An eligible not-for-
profit servicer shall no longer be eligible for a
contract under this paragraph after July 1, 2014,
if--
``(I) the servicer has not been
awarded such a contract before that
date; or
``(II) the servicer's contract was
terminated, and the servicer had not
reapplied for, and been awarded, a
contract under this paragraph.
``(B) Allocations.--
``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall (except
as provided in clause (ii)) allocate to an
eligible not-for-profit servicer, subject to the
contract of such servicer described in
subparagraph (A), the servicing rights for the
loan accounts of 100,000 borrowers (including
borrowers who borrowed loans in a prior year that
were serviced by the servicer).
``(ii) Servicer allocation.--The Secretary may
reallocate, increase, reduce, or terminate an
eligible not-for-profit servicer's allocation of
servicing rights under clause (i) based on the
performance of such servicer, on the same terms as
loan allocations provided by contracts awarded
pursuant to paragraph (1).''; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:

``(c) Definition of Eligible Not-for-profit Servicer.--In this
section:
``(1) In general.--The term `eligible not-for-profit
servicer' means an entity--
``(A) that is not owned or controlled in whole or in
part by--
``(i) a for-profit entity; or
``(ii) a nonprofit entity having its principal
place of business in another State; and
``(B) that--
``(i) as of July 1, 2009--
``(I) meets the definition of an
eligible not-for-profit holder under
section 435(p), except that such term
does not include eligible lenders
described in paragraph (1)(D) of such
section; and
``(II) was performing, or had
entered into a contract with a third
party servicer (as such term is defined
in section 481(c)) who was performing,
student loan servicing functions for
loans made under part B of this title;

[[Page 1080]]

``(ii) notwithstanding clause (i), as of July
1, 2009--
``(I) is the sole beneficial owner
of a loan for which the special
allowance rate is calculated under
section 438(b)(2)(I)(vi)(II) because the
loan is held by an eligible lender
trustee that is an eligible not-for-
profit holder as defined under section
435(p)(1)(D); and
``(II) was performing, or had
entered into a contract with a third
party servicer (as such term is defined
in section 481(c)) who was performing,
student loan servicing functions for
loans made under part B of this title;
or
``(iii) is an affiliated entity of an eligible
not-for-profit servicer described in clause (i) or
(ii) that--
``(I) directly employs, or will
directly employ (on or before the date
the entity begins servicing loans under
a contract awarded by the Secretary
pursuant to subsection (a)(3)(A)), the
majority of individuals who perform
borrower-specific student loan servicing
functions; and
``(II) as of July 1, 2009, was
performing, or had entered into a
contract with a third party servicer (as
such term is defined in section 481(c))
who was performing, student loan
servicing functions for loans made under
part B of this title.
``(2) Affiliated entity.--For the purposes of paragraph (1),
the term `affiliated entity'--
``(A) means an entity contracted to perform services
for an eligible not-for-profit servicer that--
``(i) is a nonprofit entity or is wholly owned
by a nonprofit entity; and
``(ii) is not owned or controlled, in whole or
in part, by--
``(I) a for-profit entity; or
``(II) an entity having its
principal place of business in another
State; and
``(B) may include an affiliated entity that is
established by an eligible not-for-profit servicer after
the date of enactment of the SAFRA Act, if such
affiliated entity is otherwise described in paragraph
(1)(B)(iii)(I) and subparagraph (A) of this
paragraph.''.

(b) Mandatory Funds.--
(1) Amendments.--Section 458(a) (20 U.S.C. 1087h(a)) is
amended--
(A) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (8);
(B) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as
paragraphs (3) through (5), respectively;
(C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following
new paragraph:
``(2) Mandatory funds for eligible not-for-profit
servicers.--For fiscal years 2010 through 2019, there shall be
available to the Secretary, in addition to any other amounts
appropriated to carry out this paragraph and out of any money in
the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, funds to be obligated
for administrative costs of servicing contracts with eligible
not-for-profit servicers as described in section 456.''; and

[[Page 1081]]

(D) by inserting after paragraph (5), as
redesignated by subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, the
following:
``(6) Technical assistance to institutions of higher
education.--
``(A) Provision of assistance.--The Secretary shall
provide institutions of higher education participating,
or seeking to participate, in the loan programs under
this part with technical assistance in establishing and
administering such programs.
``(B) Funds.--There are authorized to be
appropriated, and there are appropriated, to carry out
this paragraph (in addition to any other amounts
appropriated to carry out this paragraph and out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated),
$50,000,000 for fiscal year 2010.
``(C) Definition.--In this paragraph, the term
`assistance' means the provision of technical support,
training, materials, technical assistance, and financial
assistance.
``(7) Additional payments.--
``(A) Provision of assistance.--The Secretary shall
provide payments to loan servicers for retaining jobs at
locations in the United States where such servicers were
operating under part B on January 1, 2010.
``(B) Funds.--There are authorized to be
appropriated, and there are appropriated, to carry out
this paragraph (in addition to any other amounts
appropriated to carry out this paragraph and out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated),
$25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 and
2011.''.
(2) Conforming amendment.--Section 458 (20 U.S.C. 1087h) is
further amended by striking ``subsection (a)(3)'' in subsection
(b) and inserting ``subsection (a)(4)''.
SEC. 2213. INCOME-BASED REPAYMENT.

Section 493C (20 U.S.C. 1098e) is amended by adding at the end the
following new subsection:
``(e) Special Terms for New Borrowers on and After July 1, 2014.--
<> With respect to any loan made to a new
borrower on or after July 1, 2014--
``(1) subsection (a)(3)(B) shall be applied by substituting
`10 percent' for `15 percent'; and
``(2) subsection (b)(7)(B) shall be applied by substituting
`20 years' for `25 years'.''.

Subtitle B--Health

SEC. 2301. INSURANCE REFORMS.

(a) Extending Certain Insurance Reforms to Grandfathered Plans.--
Section 1251(a) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as
added by section 10103(d) of such Act, is <> amended by adding at the end the following:
``(4) Application of certain provisions.--
``(A) In general.--The following provisions of the
Public Health Service Act (as added by this title) shall

[[Page 1082]]

apply to grandfathered health plans for plan years
beginning with the first plan year to which such
provisions would otherwise apply:
``(i) Section 2708 (relating to excessive
waiting periods).
``(ii) Those provisions of section 2711
relating to lifetime limits.
``(iii) Section 2712 (relating to
rescissions).
``(iv) Section 2714 (relating to extension of
dependent coverage).
``(B) Provisions applicable only to group health
plans.--
``(i) Provisions described.--Those provisions
of section 2711 relating to annual limits and the
provisions of section 2704 (relating to pre-
existing condition exclusions) of the Public
Health Service Act (as added by this subtitle)
shall apply to grandfathered health plans that are
group health plans for plan years beginning with
the first plan year to which such provisions
otherwise apply.
``(ii) Adult child coverage.--For plan years
beginning before January 1, 2014, the provisions
of section 2714 of the Public Health Service Act
(as added by this subtitle) shall apply in the
case of an adult child with respect to a
grandfathered health plan that is a group health
plan only if such adult child is not eligible to
enroll in an eligible employer-sponsored health
plan (as defined in section 5000A(f)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986) other than such
grandfathered health plan.''.

(b) Clarification Regarding Dependent Coverage.--Section 2714(a) of
the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 1001(5) of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, <> is
amended by striking ``(who is not married)''.
SEC. 2302. DRUGS PURCHASED BY COVERED ENTITIES.

Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b), as
amended by sections 7101 and 7102 of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, is amended--
(1) in subsection (a)--
(A) in paragraphs (1), (2), (5), (7), and (9), by
striking the terms ``covered drug'' and ``covered
drugs'' each place either term appears and inserting
``covered outpatient drug'' or ``covered outpatient
drugs'', respectively;
(B) in paragraph (4)(L)--
(i) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the
end;
(ii) in clause (ii), by striking the period
and inserting ``; and''; and
(iii) by inserting after clause (ii), the
following:
``(iii) does not obtain covered outpatient
drugs through a group purchasing organization or
other group purchasing arrangement.''; and
(C) in paragraph (5)--
(i) by striking subparagraph (C);
(ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and
(E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively;
and

[[Page 1083]]

(iii) in subparagraph (D), as so redesignated,
by striking ``subparagraph (D)'' and inserting
``subparagraph (C)'';
(2) by striking subsection (c);
(3) in subsection (d)--
(A) by striking ``covered drugs'' each place it
appears and inserting ``covered outpatient drugs'';
(B) by striking ``(a)(5)(D)'' each place it appears
and inserting ``(a)(5)(C)''; and
(C) by striking ``(a)(5)(E)'' each place it appears
and inserting ``(a)(5)(D)''; and
(4) by inserting after subsection (d) the following:

``(e) Exclusion of Orphan Drugs for Certain Covered Entities.--For
covered entities described in subparagraph (M), (N), or (O) of
subsection (a)(4), the term `covered outpatient drug' shall not include
a drug designated by the Secretary under section 526 of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act for a rare disease or condition.''.
SEC. 2303. COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS.

Section 10503(b)(1) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act is <> amended--
(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``700,000,000'' and
inserting ``1,000,000,000'';
(2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``800,000,000'' and
inserting ``1,200,000,000'';
(3) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``1,000,000,000'' and
inserting ``1,500,000,000'';
(4) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``1,600,000,000'' and
inserting ``2,200,000,000''; and
(5) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``2,900,000,000'' and
inserting ``3,600,000,000''.

Approved March 30, 2010.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--H.R. 4872:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE REPORTS: No. 111-443 (Comm. on the Budget).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 156 (2010):
Mar. 21, considered and passed House.
Mar. 23, 24, considered in Senate.
Mar. 25, considered and passed Senate, amended. House
concurred in Senate amendments.
DAILY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS (2010):
Mar. 30, Presidential remarks.

[United States Statutes at Large, Volume 129, 114th Congress, 1st Session]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov]


Public Law 114-41
114th Congress

An Act


 
To provide an extension of Federal-aid highway, highway safety, motor
carrier safety, transit, and other programs funded out of the Highway
Trust Fund, to provide resource flexibility to the Department of
Veterans Affairs for health care services, and for other
purposes. <>

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, <>
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS; TABLE OF
CONTENTS.

(a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Surface
Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act of
2015''.
(b) Reconciliation of Funds.--The Secretary of Transportation shall
reduce the amount apportioned or allocated for a program, project, or
activity under this Act in fiscal year 2015 by amounts apportioned or
allocated pursuant to the Highway and Transportation Funding Act of 2014
and the Highway and Transportation Funding Act of 2015, including the
amendments made by such Acts, for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015.
(c) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; reconciliation of funds; table of contents.

TITLE I--SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM EXTENSION

Subtitle A--Federal-Aid Highways

Sec. 1001. Extension of Federal-aid highway programs.
Sec. 1002. Administrative expenses.

Subtitle B--Extension of Highway Safety Programs

Sec. 1101. Extension of National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
highway safety programs.
Sec. 1102. Extension of Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
programs.
Sec. 1103. Dingell-Johnson Sport Fish Restoration Act.

Subtitle C--Public Transportation Programs

Sec. 1201. Formula grants for rural areas.
Sec. 1202. Apportionment of appropriations for formula grants.
Sec. 1203. Authorizations for public transportation.
Sec. 1204. Bus and bus facilities formula grants.

Subtitle D--Hazardous Materials

Sec. 1301. Authorization of appropriations.

TITLE II--REVENUE PROVISIONS

Sec. 2001. Extension of Highway Trust Fund expenditure authority.
Sec. 2002. Funding of Highway Trust Fund.

[[Page 444]]

Sec. 2003. Modification of mortgage reporting requirements.
Sec. 2004. Consistent basis reporting between estate and person
acquiring property from decedent.
Sec. 2005. Clarification of 6-year statute of limitations in case of
overstatement of basis.
Sec. 2006. Tax return due dates.
Sec. 2007. Transfers of excess pension assets to retiree health
accounts.
Sec. 2008. Equalization of Highway Trust Fund excise taxes on liquefied
natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, and compressed natural
gas.

TITLE III--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 3001. Service fees.

TITLE IV--VETERANS PROVISIONS

Sec. 4001. Short title.
Sec. 4002. Plan to consolidate programs of Department of Veterans
Affairs to improve access to care.
Sec. 4003. Funding account for non-Department care.
Sec. 4004. Temporary authorization of use of Veterans Choice Funds for
certain programs.
Sec. 4005. Modifications of Veterans Choice Program.
Sec. 4006. Limitation on dialysis pilot program.
Sec. 4007. Amendments to Internal Revenue Code with respect to health
coverage of veterans.
Sec. 4008. Emergency designations.

TITLE I--SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM EXTENSION

Subtitle A--Federal-Aid Highways

SEC. 1001. EXTENSION OF FEDERAL-AID HIGHWAY PROGRAMS.

(a) In General.--Section 1001(a) of the Highway and Transportation
Funding Act of 2014 (128 Stat. 1840) is amended by striking ``July 31,
2015'' and inserting ``October 29, 2015''.
(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--
(1) Highway trust fund.--Section 1001(b)(1) of the Highway
and Transportation Funding Act of 2014 (128 Stat. 1840) is
amended to read as follows:
``(1) Highway trust fund.--Except as provided in section
1002, there is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway
Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account)--
``(A) for fiscal year 2015, a sum equal to the total
amount authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway
Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) for
programs, projects, and activities for fiscal year 2014
under divisions A and E of MAP-21 (Public Law 112-141)
and title 23, United States Code (excluding chapter 4 of
that title); and
``(B) for the period beginning on October 1, 2015,
and ending on October 29, 2015, \29/366\ of the total
amount authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway
Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) for
programs, projects, and activities for fiscal year 2015
under divisions A and E of MAP-21 (Public Law 112-141)
and title 23, United States Code (excluding chapter 4 of
that title).''.
(2) General fund.--Section 1123(h)(1) of MAP-21 (23 U.S.C.
202 note) is amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013 and
2014 and $24,986,301 out of the general fund of the Treasury to
carry out the program for the period beginning

[[Page 445]]

on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting
``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and $2,377,049 out of
the general fund of the Treasury to carry out the program for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October
29, 2015''.

(c) Use of Funds.--
(1) In general.--Section 1001(c)(1) of the Highway and
Transportation Funding Act of 2014 (128 Stat. 1840) is amended
by striking ``(1) In general.--'' and all that follows through
``to carry out programs'' and inserting the following:
``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise expressly provided in
this subtitle, funds authorized to be appropriated under
subsection (b)(1)--
``(A) for fiscal year 2015 shall be distributed,
administered, limited, and made available for obligation
in the same manner and at the same levels as the amounts
of funds authorized to be appropriated out of the
Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account)
for fiscal year 2014; and
``(B) for the period beginning on October 1, 2015,
and ending on October 29, 2015, shall be distributed,
administered, limited, and made available for obligation
in the same manner and at the same levels as \29/366\ of
the amounts of funds authorized to be appropriated out
of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit
Account) for fiscal year 2015,
to carry out programs''.
(2) Obligation ceiling.--Section 1102 of MAP-21 (23 U.S.C.
104 note) is amended--
(A) in subsection (a)--
(i) by striking ``and'' at the end of
paragraph (2); and
(ii) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting
the following:
``(3) $40,256,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(4) $3,189,683,060 for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.'';
(B) in subsection (b)(12)--
(i) by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013
through 2014'' and inserting ``each of fiscal
years 2013 through 2015''; and
(ii) by striking ``, and for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July
31, 2015, only in an amount equal to $639,000,000,
less any reductions that would have otherwise been
required for that year by section 251A of the
Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 901a), then multiplied by \304/
365\ for that period'' and inserting ``, and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015, only in an amount
equal to $639,000,000, less any reductions that
would have otherwise been required for that year
by section 251A of the Balanced Budget and
Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C.
901a), then multiplied by \29/366\ for that
period'';
(C) in subsection (c)--

[[Page 446]]

(i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by
striking ``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2014
and for the period beginning on October 1, 2014,
and ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``each
of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and for the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015''; and
(ii) in paragraph (2) in the matter preceding
subparagraph (A) by striking ``for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July
31, 2015, that is equal to \304/365\ of such
unobligated balance'' and inserting ``for the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015, that is equal to \29/366\ of
such unobligated balance'';
(D) in subsection (d) in the matter preceding
paragraph (1) by striking ``2015'' and inserting
``2016''; and
(E) in subsection (f)(1) in the matter preceding
subparagraph (A) by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013
through 2014 and for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``each
of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015''.
SEC. 1002. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.

Section 1002 of the Highway and Transportation Funding Act of 2014
(128 Stat. 1842) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a) by striking ``for administrative
expenses of the Federal-aid highway program $366,465,753 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015.'' and inserting ``for administrative expenses of the
Federal-aid highway program--
``(1) $440,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(2) $34,863,388 for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''; and
(2) by striking subsection (b)(2) and inserting the
following:
``(2) <> for fiscal year 2015 and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October
29, 2015, subject to the limitations on administrative expenses
under the heading `Federal Highway Administration' in
appropriations Acts that apply, respectively, to that fiscal
year and period.''.

Subtitle B--Extension of Highway Safety Programs

SEC. 1101. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION HIGHWAY SAFETY PROGRAMS.

(a) Extension of Programs.--
(1) Highway safety programs.--Section 31101(a)(1) of MAP-21
(126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph
(B); and
(B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:
``(C) $235,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $18,620,219 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.

[[Page 447]]

(2) Highway safety research and development.--Section
31101(a)(2) of MAP-21 (126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph
(B); and
(B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:
``(C) $113,500,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $8,993,169 for the period beginning on October
1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.
(3) National priority safety programs.--Section 31101(a)(3)
of MAP-21 (126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph
(B); and
(B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:
``(C) $272,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $21,551,913 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.
(4) National driver register.--Section 31101(a)(4) of MAP-21
(126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph
(B); and
(B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:
``(C) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $396,175 for the period beginning on October
1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.
(5) High visibility enforcement program.--
(A) Authorization of appropriations.--Section
31101(a)(5) of MAP-21 (126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(i) by striking ``and'' at the end of
subparagraph (B); and
(ii) by striking subparagraph (C) and
inserting the following:
``(C) $29,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $2,297,814 for the period beginning on October
1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.
(B) Law enforcement campaigns.--Section 2009(a) of
SAFETEA-LU (23 U.S.C. 402 note) is amended--
(i) in the first sentence by striking ``each
of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and in the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July
31, 2015'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years
2013 through 2015 and in the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015'';
and
(ii) in the second sentence by striking ``each
of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and in the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July
31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years
2013 through 2015 and in the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015,''.
(6) Administrative expenses.--Section 31101(a)(6) of MAP-21
(126 Stat. 733) is amended--
(A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph
(B); and
(B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the
following:

[[Page 448]]

``(C) $25,500,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(D) $2,020,492 for the period beginning on October
1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.

(b) Cooperative Research and Evaluation.--Section 403(f)(1) of title
23, United States Code, is amended by striking ``each fiscal year ending
before October 1, 2014, and $2,082,192 of the total amount available for
apportionment to the States for highway safety programs under section
402(c) in the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July
31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each fiscal year ending before October 1,
2015, and $198,087 of the total amount available for apportionment to
the States for highway safety programs under section 402(c) in the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.
(c) Applicability of Title 23.--Section 31101(c) of MAP-21 (126
Stat. 733) is amended by striking ``fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,''
and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and for the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.
SEC. 1102. EXTENSION OF FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION PROGRAMS.

(a) Motor Carrier Safety Grants.--Section 31104(a) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended--
(1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9); and
(2) by striking paragraph (10) and inserting the following:
``(10) $218,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(11) $17,273,224 for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.

(b) Administrative Expenses.--Section 31104(i)(1) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended--
(1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (I); and
(2) by striking subparagraph (J) and inserting the
following:
``(J) $259,000,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(K) $20,521,858 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.

(c) Grant Programs.--
(1) Commercial driver's license program improvement
grants.--Section 4101(c)(1) of SAFETEA-LU (119 Stat. 1715) is
amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and
$24,986,301 for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and
ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years
2013 through 2015 and $2,377,049 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015''.
(2) Border enforcement grants.--Section 4101(c)(2) of
SAFETEA-LU (119 Stat. 1715) is amended by striking ``each of
fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and $26,652,055 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and
$2,535,519 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015''.
(3) Performance and registration information system
management grant program.--Section 4101(c)(3) of SAFETEA-LU (119
Stat. 1715) is amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013
and 2014 and $4,164,384 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``each of
fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and

[[Page 449]]

$396,175 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending
on October 29, 2015''.
(4) Commercial vehicle information systems and networks
deployment program.--Section 4101(c)(4) of SAFETEA-LU (119 Stat.
1715) is amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013 and
2014 and $20,821,918 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``each of
fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and $1,980,874 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015''.
(5) Safety data improvement grants.--Section 4101(c)(5) of
SAFETEA-LU (119 Stat. 1715) is amended by striking ``each of
fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and $2,498,630 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and $237,705
for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015''.

(d) High-Priority Activities.--Section 31104(k)(2) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended by striking ``each of fiscal years 2006
through 2014 and up to $12,493,151 for the period beginning on October
1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal
years 2006 through 2015 and up to $1,188,525 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.
(e) New Entrant Audits.--Section 31144(g)(5)(B) of title 49, United
States Code, is amended by striking ``per fiscal year and up to
$26,652,055 for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on
July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``per fiscal year and up to $2,535,519
for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015,''.
(f) Outreach and Education.--Section 4127(e) of SAFETEA-LU (119
Stat. 1741) <> is amended by striking ``each
of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and $3,331,507 to the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal
years 2013 through 2015 and $316,940 to the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending
on October 29, 2015,''.

(g) Grant Program for Commercial Motor Vehicle Operators.--Section
4134(c) of SAFETEA-LU (49 U.S.C. 31301 note) is amended by striking
``each of fiscal years 2005 through 2014 and $832,877 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and
inserting ``each of fiscal years 2005 through 2015 and $79,235 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.
SEC. 1103. DINGELL-JOHNSON SPORT FISH RESTORATION ACT.

Section 4 of the Dingell-Johnson Sport Fish Restoration Act (16
U.S.C. 777c) is amended--
(1) in subsection (a) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)
by striking ``each fiscal year through 2014 and for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``each fiscal year through 2015 and for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015'';
and
(2) in subsection (b)(1)(A) by striking ``for each fiscal
year ending before October 1, 2014, and for the period beginning

[[Page 450]]

on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``for each fiscal year ending before October 1, 2015, and for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October
29, 2015,''.

Subtitle C--Public Transportation Programs

SEC. 1201. FORMULA GRANTS FOR RURAL AREAS.

Section 5311(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
(1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``for each fiscal year
ending before October 1, 2014, and $4,164,384 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and
inserting ``for each fiscal year ending before October 1, 2015,
and $396,175 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015,''; and
(2) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``for each fiscal year
ending before October 1, 2014, and $20,821,918 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and
inserting ``for each fiscal year ending before October 1, 2015,
and $1,980,874 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015,''.
SEC. 1202. APPORTIONMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FORMULA GRANTS.

Section 5336(h)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by
striking ``for each fiscal year ending before October 1, 2014, and
$24,986,301 for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on
July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``for each fiscal year ending before
October 1, 2015, and $2,377,049 for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.
SEC. 1203. AUTHORIZATIONS FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION.

(a) Formula Grants.--Section 5338(a) of title 49, United States
Code, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``and $7,158,575,342 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015'' and inserting ``$8,595,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and
$681,024,590 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015'';
(2) in paragraph (2)--
(A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``and
$107,274,521 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$128,800,000 for fiscal 2015, and $10,205,464 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,'';
(B) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``for each of
fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and $8,328,767 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015,'' and inserting ``for each of fiscal years 2013
through 2015 and $792,350 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,'';
(C) in subparagraph (C) by striking ``and
$3,713,505,753 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$4,458,650,000

[[Page 451]]

for fiscal year 2015, and $353,281,011 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015,'';
(D) in subparagraph (D) by striking ``and
$215,132,055 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$258,300,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $20,466,393 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,'';
(E) in subparagraph (E)--
(i) by striking ``and $506,222,466 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on
July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``$607,800,000 for
fiscal year 2015, and $48,159,016 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,'';
(ii) by striking ``and $24,986,301 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on
July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``$30,000,000 for
fiscal year 2015, and $2,377,049 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,''; and
(iii) by striking ``and $16,657,534 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on
July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``$20,000,000 for
fiscal year 2015, and $1,584,699 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,'';
(F) in subparagraph (F) by striking ``each of fiscal
years 2013 and 2014 and $2,498,630 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013
through 2015 and $237,705 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,'';
(G) in subparagraph (G) by striking ``each of fiscal
years 2013 and 2014 and $4,164,384 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013
through 2015 and $396,175 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,'';
(H) in subparagraph (H) by striking ``each of fiscal
years 2013 and 2014 and $3,206,575 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2013
through 2015 and $305,055 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,'';
(I) in subparagraph (I) by striking ``and
$1,803,927,671 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$2,165,900,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $171,615,027
for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending
on October 29, 2015,'';
(J) in subparagraph (J) by striking ``and
$356,304,658 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$427,800,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $33,896,721 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,''; and
(K) in subparagraph (K) by striking ``and
$438,009,863 for the period beginning on October 1,
2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``$525,900,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $41,669,672 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on
October 29, 2015,''.

[[Page 452]]

(b) Research, Development Demonstration and Deployment Projects.--
Section 5338(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking
``and $58,301,370 for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and
ending on July 31, 2015'' and inserting ``$70,000,000 for fiscal year
2015, and $5,546,448 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015''.
(c) Transit Cooperative Research Program.--Section 5338(c) of title
49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and $5,830,137 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``$7,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $554,645 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015''.
(d) Technical Assistance and Standards Development.--Section 5338(d)
of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and $5,830,137
for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015'' and inserting ``$7,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $554,645 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015''.
(e) Human Resources and Training.--Section 5338(e) of title 49,
United States Code, is amended by striking ``and $4,164,384 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``$5,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $396,175 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015''.
(f) Capital Investment Grants.--Section 5338(g) of title 49, United
States Code, is amended by striking ``and $1,558,295,890 for the period
beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015'' and
inserting ``$1,907,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and $151,101,093 for
the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29,
2015''.
(g) Administration.--Section 5338(h) of title 49, United States
Code, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``and $86,619,178 for the
period beginning on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31,
2015'' and inserting ``$104,000,000 for fiscal year 2015, and
$8,240,437 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and
ending on October 29, 2015'';
(2) in paragraph (2) by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013
and 2014 and not less than $4,164,384 for the period beginning
on October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and not less than
$396,175 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending
on October 29, 2015,''; and
(3) in paragraph (3) by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013
and 2014 and not less than $832,877 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting
``each of fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and not less than
$79,235 for the period beginning on October 1, 2015, and ending
on October 29, 2015,''.
SEC. 1204. BUS AND BUS FACILITIES FORMULA GRANTS.

Section 5339(d)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
(1) by striking ``each of fiscal years 2013 and 2014 and
$54,553,425 for the period beginning on October 1, 2014, and
ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years
2013 through 2015 and $5,189,891 for the period beginning on
October 1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,'';

[[Page 453]]

(2) by striking ``$1,041,096 for such period'' and inserting
``$99,044 for such period''; and
(3) by striking ``$416,438 for such period'' and inserting
``$39,617 for such period''.

Subtitle D--Hazardous Materials

SEC. 1301. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

(a) In General.--Section 5128(a) of title 49, United States Code, is
amended--
(1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2); and
(2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
``(3) $42,762,000 for fiscal year 2015; and
``(4) $3,388,246 for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015.''.

(b) Hazardous Materials Emergency Preparedness Fund.--Section
5128(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1)--
(A) in the paragraph heading by striking ``Fiscal
years 2013 and 2014'' and inserting ``Fiscal years 2013
through 2015''; and
(B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by
striking ``fiscal years 2013 and 2014'' and inserting
``fiscal years 2013 through 2015''; and
(2) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
``(2) Fiscal year 2016.--From the Hazardous Materials
Emergency Preparedness Fund established under section 5116(i),
the Secretary may expend for the period beginning on October 1,
2015, and ending on October 29, 2015--
``(A) $14,896 to carry out section 5115;
``(B) $1,727,322 to carry out subsections (a) and
(b) of section 5116, of which not less than $1,081,557
shall be available to carry out section 5116(b);
``(C) $11,885 to carry out section 5116(f);
``(D) $49,522 to publish and distribute the
Emergency Response Guidebook under section 5116(i)(3);
and
``(E) $79,235 to carry out section 5116(j).''.

(c) Hazardous Materials Training Grants.--Section 5128(c) of title
49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``each of the fiscal
years 2013 and 2014 and $3,331,507 for the period beginning on October
1, 2014, and ending on July 31, 2015,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal
years 2013 through 2015 and $316,940 for the period beginning on October
1, 2015, and ending on October 29, 2015,''.

TITLE II--REVENUE PROVISIONS

SEC. 2001. EXTENSION OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY.

(a) Highway Trust Fund.--Section 9503 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 <> is amended--
(1) by striking ``August 1, 2015'' in subsections (b)(6)(B),
(c)(1), and (e)(3) and inserting ``October 30, 2015'', and
(2) by striking ``Highway and Transportation Funding Act of
2015'' in subsections (c)(1) and (e)(3) and inserting ``Surface

[[Page 454]]

Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act
of 2015''.

(b) Sport Fish Restoration and Boating Trust Fund.--Section 9504 of
such Code <> is amended--
(1) by striking ``Highway and Transportation Funding Act of
2015'' each place it appears in subsection (b)(2) and inserting
``Surface Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice
Improvement Act of 2015'', and
(2) by striking ``August 1, 2015'' in subsection (d)(2) and
inserting ``October 30, 2015''.

(c) Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund.--Section 9508(e)(2)
of such Code is amended by striking ``August 1, 2015'' and inserting
``October 30, 2015''.
SEC. 2002. FUNDING OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND.

Section 9503(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by
redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8) and by inserting after
paragraph (6) the following new paragraph:
``(7) <> Additional
sums.--Out of money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
there is hereby appropriated--
``(A) $6,068,000,000 to the Highway Account (as
defined in subsection (e)(5)(B)) in the Highway Trust
Fund; and
``(B) $2,000,000,000 to the Mass Transit Account in
the Highway Trust Fund.''.
SEC. 2003. MODIFICATION OF MORTGAGE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

(a) Information Return Requirements.--Section 6050H(b)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end
of subparagraph (C), by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph
(G) and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new
subparagraphs:
``(D) the amount of outstanding principal on the
mortgage as of the beginning of such calendar year,
``(E) the date of the origination of the mortgage,
``(F) the address (or other description in the case
of property without an address) of the property which
secures the mortgage, and''.

(b) Statements to Individuals.--Section 6050H(d)(2) of such Code is
amended by striking ``subsection (b)(2)(C)'' and inserting
``subparagraphs (C), (D), (E), and (F) of subsection (b)(2)''.
(c) <> Effective Date.--The
amendments made by this section shall apply to returns required to be
made, and statements required to be furnished, after December 31, 2016.
SEC. 2004. CONSISTENT BASIS REPORTING BETWEEN ESTATE AND PERSON
ACQUIRING PROPERTY FROM DECEDENT.

(a) Property Acquired From a Decedent.--Section 1014 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subsection:
``(f) Basis Must Be Consistent With Estate Tax Return.--For purposes
of this section--
``(1) <> In general.--The basis of any
property to which subsection (a) applies shall not exceed--
``(A) in the case of property the final value of
which has been determined for purposes of the tax
imposed by chapter 11 on the estate of such decedent,
such value, and

[[Page 455]]

``(B) in the case of property not described in
subparagraph (A) and with respect to which a statement
has been furnished under section 6035(a) identifying the
value of such property, such value.
``(2) <> Exception.--Paragraph (1)
shall only apply to any property whose inclusion in the
decedent's estate increased the liability for the tax imposed by
chapter 11 (reduced by credits allowable against such tax) on
such estate.
``(3) Determination.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the
basis of property has been determined for purposes of the tax
imposed by chapter 11 if--
``(A) the value of such property is shown on a
return under section 6018 and such value is not
contested by the Secretary before the expiration of the
time for assessing a tax under chapter 11,
``(B) in a case not described in subparagraph (A),
the value is specified by the Secretary and such value
is not timely contested by the executor of the estate,
or
``(C) the value is determined by a court or pursuant
to a settlement agreement with the Secretary.
``(4) Regulations.--The Secretary may by regulations provide
exceptions to the application of this subsection.''.

(b) Information Reporting.--
(1) In general.--Subpart A of part III of subchapter A of
chapter 61 of such Code is amended by inserting after section
6034A the following new section:
``SEC. 6035. <> BASIS INFORMATION TO PERSONS
ACQUIRING PROPERTY FROM DECEDENT.

``(a) Information With Respect to Property Acquired From
Decedents.--
``(1) In general.--The executor of any estate required to
file a return under section 6018(a) shall furnish to the
Secretary and to each person acquiring any interest in property
included in the decedent's gross estate for Federal estate tax
purposes a statement identifying the value of each interest in
such property as reported on such return and such other
information with respect to such interest as the Secretary may
prescribe.
``(2) Statements by beneficiaries.--Each person required to
file a return under section 6018(b) shall furnish to the
Secretary and to each other person who holds a legal or
beneficial interest in the property to which such return relates
a statement identifying the information described in paragraph
(1).
``(3) Time for furnishing statement.--
``(A) In general.--Each statement required to be
furnished under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be furnished
at such time as the Secretary may prescribe, but in no
case at a time later than the earlier of--
``(i) the date which is 30 days after the date
on which the return under section 6018 was
required to be filed (including extensions, if
any), or
``(ii) the date which is 30 days after the
date such return is filed.
``(B) <> Adjustments.--In any case
in which there is an adjustment to the information
required to be included on a statement filed under
paragraph (1) or (2) after such

[[Page 456]]

statement has been filed, a supplemental statement under
such paragraph shall be filed not later than the date
which is 30 days after such adjustment is made.

``(b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations
as necessary to carry out this section, including regulations relating
to--
``(1) the application of this section to property with
regard to which no estate tax return is required to be filed,
and
``(2) situations in which the surviving joint tenant or
other recipient may have better information than the executor
regarding the basis or fair market value of the property.''.
(2) Penalty for failure to file.--
(A) Return.--Section 6724(d)(1) of such
Code <> is amended by striking
``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the
period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``,
and'', and by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
``(D) any statement required to be filed with the
Secretary under section 6035.''.
(B) Statement.--Section 6724(d)(2) of such Code is
amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph
(GG), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph
(HH) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end
the following new subparagraph:
``(II) section 6035 (other than a statement
described in paragraph (1)(D)).''.
(3) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A
of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 <>  of such Code is amended by inserting after the item
relating to section 6034A the following new item:

``Sec. 6035. Basis information to persons acquiring property from
decedent.''.

(c) Penalty for Inconsistent Reporting.--
(1) In general.--Section 6662(b) of such Code is amended by
inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraph:
``(8) Any inconsistent estate basis.''.
(2) Inconsistent basis reporting.--Section 6662 of such Code
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:

``(k) Inconsistent Estate Basis Reporting.--For purposes of this
section, there is an `inconsistent estate basis' if the basis of
property claimed on a return exceeds the basis as determined under
section 1014(f).''.
(d) <> Effective Date.--The
amendments made by this section shall apply to property with respect to
which an estate tax return is filed after the date of the enactment of
this Act.
SEC. 2005. CLARIFICATION OF 6-YEAR STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS IN CASE
OF OVERSTATEMENT OF BASIS.

(a) In General.--Section 6501(e)(1)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 <> is amended--
(1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i), by
redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii), and by inserting
after clause (i) the following new clause:
``(ii) An understatement of gross income by
reason of an overstatement of unrecovered cost or
other basis is an omission from gross income;
and'', and

[[Page 457]]

(2) by inserting ``(other than in the case of an
overstatement of unrecovered cost or other basis)'' in clause
(iii) (as so redesignated) after ``In determining the amount
omitted from gross income''.

(b) <> Effective Date.--The
amendments made by this section shall apply to--
(1) returns filed after the date of the enactment of this
Act, and
(2) returns filed on or before such date if the period
specified in section 6501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
(determined without regard to such amendments) for assessment of
the taxes with respect to which such return relates has not
expired as of such date.
SEC. 2006. TAX RETURN DUE DATES.

(a) Due Dates for Returns of Partnerships, S Corporations, and C
Corporations.--
(1) Partnerships and s corporations.--
(A) In general.--So much of subsection (b) of 6072
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as precedes the
second sentence thereof <> is
amended to read as follows:

``(b) Returns of Partnerships and S Corporations.--Returns of
partnerships under section 6031 and returns of S corporations under
sections 6012 and 6037 made on the basis of the calendar year shall be
filed on or before the 15th day of March following the close of the
calendar year, and such returns made on the basis of a fiscal year shall
be filed on or before the 15th day of the third month following the
close of the fiscal year.''.
(B) Conforming amendment.--Section 6072(a) of such
Code is amended by striking ``6017, or 6031'' and
inserting ``or 6017''.
(2) Conforming amendments relating to c corporation due date
of 15th day of fourth month following taxable year.--
(A) Section 170(a)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by
striking ``third month'' and inserting ``fourth month''.
(B) Section 563 of such Code is amended by striking
``third month'' each place it appears and inserting
``fourth month''.
(C) Section 1354(d)(1)(B)(i) of such Code is amended
by striking ``3d month'' and inserting ``4th month''.
(D) Subsections (a) and (c) of section 6167 of such
Code are each amended by striking ``third month'' and
inserting ``fourth month''.
(E) Section 6425(a)(1) of such Code is amended by
striking ``third month'' and inserting ``fourth month''.
(F) Subsections (b)(2)(A), (g)(3), and (h)(1) of
section 6655 of such Code are each amended by striking
``3rd month'' and inserting ``4th month''.
(G) Section 6655(g)(4) of such Code is amended by
redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F) and
by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new
subparagraph:
``(E) <> Subsection (b)(2)(A)
shall be applied by substituting `3rd month' for `4th
month'.''.
(3) <> Effective
dates.--

[[Page 458]]

(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph
(B), the amendments made by this subsection shall apply
to returns for taxable years beginning after December
31, 2015.
(B) Special rule for c corporations with fiscal
years ending on june 30.--In the case of any C
corporation with a taxable year ending on June 30, the
amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
returns for taxable years beginning after December 31,
2025.

(b) <> Modification of Due Dates
by Regulation.--In the case of returns for taxable years beginning after
December 31, 2015, the Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's
designee, shall modify appropriate regulations to provide as follows:
(1) The maximum extension for the returns of partnerships
filing Form 1065 shall be a 6-month period ending on September
15 for calendar year taxpayers.
(2) The maximum extension for the returns of trusts filing
Form 1041 shall be a 5\1/2\-month period ending on September 30
for calendar year taxpayers.
(3) The maximum extension for the returns of employee
benefit plans filing Form 5500 shall be an automatic 3\1/2\-
month period ending on November 15 for calendar year plans.
(4) The maximum extension for the returns of organizations
exempt from income tax filing Form 990 (series) shall be an
automatic 6-month period ending on November 15 for calendar year
filers.
(5) The maximum extension for the returns of organizations
exempt from income tax that are required to file Form 4720
returns of excise taxes shall be an automatic 6-month period
beginning on the due date for filing the return (without regard
to any extensions).
(6) The maximum extension for the returns of trusts required
to file Form 5227 shall be an automatic 6-month period beginning
on the due date for filing the return (without regard to any
extensions).
(7) The maximum extension for filing Form 6069, Return of
Excise Tax on Excess Contributions to Black Lung Benefit Trust
Under Section 4953 and Computation of Section 192 Deduction,
shall be an automatic 6-month period beginning on the due date
for filing the return (without regard to any extensions).
(8) The maximum extension for a taxpayer required to file
Form 8870 shall be an automatic 6-month period beginning on the
due date for filing the return (without regard to any
extensions).
(9) The due date of Form 3520-A, Annual Information Return
of a Foreign Trust with a United States Owner, shall be the 15th
day of the 3d month after the close of the trust's taxable year,
and the maximum extension shall be a 6-month period beginning on
such day.
(10) The due date of Form 3520, Annual Return to Report
Transactions with Foreign Trusts and Receipt of Certain Foreign
Gifts, for calendar year filers shall be April 15 with a maximum
extension for a 6-month period ending on October 15.
(11) The due date of FinCEN Report 114 (relating to Report
of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts) shall be April 15

[[Page 459]]

with a maximum extension for a 6-month period ending on October
15 and with provision for an extension under rules similar to
the rules in Treas. Reg. section 1.6081-5. <> For any taxpayer required to file such Form for the
first time, any penalty for failure to timely request for, or
file, an extension, may be waived by the Secretary.

(c) Corporations Permitted Statutory Automatic 6-Month Extension of
Income Tax Returns.--
(1) In general.--Section 6081(b) of such Code <> is amended--
(A) by striking ``3 months'' and inserting ``6
months'', and
(B) <> by adding at the end
the following: ``In the case of any return for a taxable
year of a C corporation which ends on December 31 and
begins before January 1, 2026, the first sentence of
this subsection shall be applied by substituting `5
months' for `6 months'. In the case of any return for a
taxable year of a C corporation which ends on June 30
and begins before January 1, 2026, the first sentence of
this subsection shall be applied by substituting `7
months' for `6 months'.''.
(2) <>  Effective
date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
returns for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
SEC. 2007. TRANSFERS OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS TO RETIREE HEALTH
ACCOUNTS.

(a) In General.--Section 420(b)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 is amended by striking ``December 31, 2021'' and inserting
``December 31, 2025''.
(b) Conforming ERISA Amendments.--
(1) Sections 101(e)(3), 403(c)(1), and 408(b)(13) of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C.
1021(e)(3), 1103(c)(1), 1108(b)(13)) are each amended by
striking ``MAP-21' '' and inserting ``Surface Transportation and
Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act of 2015''.
(2) Section 408(b)(13) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(13))
is amended by striking ``January 1, 2022'' and inserting
``January 1, 2026''.
SEC. 2008. EQUALIZATION OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND EXCISE TAXES ON
LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS, LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GAS, AND COMPRESSED NATURAL
GAS.

(a) Liquefied Petroleum Gas.--
(1) In general.--Section 4041(a)(2)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 <> is amended by
striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i), by redesignating
clause (ii) as clause (iii), and by inserting after clause (i)
the following new clause:
``(ii) in the case of liquefied petroleum gas,
18.3 cents per energy equivalent of a gallon of
gasoline, and''.
(2) Energy equivalent of a gallon of gasoline.--Section
4041(a)(2) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the
following:
``(C) Energy equivalent of a gallon of gasoline.--
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `energy
equivalent of a gallon of gasoline' means, with respect
to a liquefied petroleum gas fuel, the amount of such
fuel having a Btu

[[Page 460]]

content of 115,400 (lower heating value). For purposes
of the preceding sentence, a Btu content of 115,400
(lower heating value) is equal to 5.75 pounds of
liquefied petroleum gas.''.

(b) Liquefied Natural Gas.--
(1) <> In general.--Section
4041(a)(2)(B) of such Code, as amended by subsection (a)(1), is
amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by
striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``,
and'' and by inserting after clause (iii) the following new
clause:
``(iv) in the case of liquefied natural gas,
24.3 cents per energy equivalent of a gallon of
diesel.''.
(2) Energy equivalent of a gallon of diesel.--Section
4041(a)(2) of such Code, as amended by subsection (a)(2), is
amended by adding at the end the following:
``(D) <> Energy equivalent of a
gallon of diesel.--For purposes of this paragraph, the
term `energy equivalent of a gallon of diesel' means,
with respect to a liquefied natural gas fuel, the amount
of such fuel having a Btu content of 128,700 (lower
heating value). For purposes of the preceding sentence,
a Btu content of 128,700 (lower heating value) is equal
to 6.06 pounds of liquefied natural gas.''.
(3) Conforming amendments.--Section 4041(a)(2)(B)(iii) of
such Code, as redesignated by subsection (a)(1), is amended--
(A) by striking ``liquefied natural gas,'', and
(B) by striking ``peat), and'' and inserting ``peat)
and''.

(c) Energy Equivalent of a Gallon of Gasoline to Compressed Natural
Gas.--Section 4041(a)(3) of such Code is amended by adding at the end
the following:
``(D) <> Energy equivalent of a
gallon of gasoline.--For purposes of this paragraph, the
term `energy equivalent of a gallon of gasoline' means
5.66 pounds of compressed natural gas.''.

(d) <> Effective Date.--The
amendments made by this section shall apply to any sale or use of fuel
after December 31, 2015.

TITLE III--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 3001. SERVICE FEES.

Paragraph (4) of section 44940(i) of title 49, United States Code,
is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
``(K) $1,560,000,000 for fiscal year 2024.
``(L) $1,600,000,000 for fiscal year 2025.''.

TITLE IV-- <> VETERANS
PROVISIONS
SEC. 4001. <> SHORT TITLE.

This title may be cited as the ``VA Budget and Choice Improvement
Act''.

[[Page 461]]

SEC. 4002. PLAN TO CONSOLIDATE PROGRAMS OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO CARE.

(a) Plan.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall develop a plan to
consolidate all non-Department provider programs by establishing a new,
single program to be known as the ``Veterans Choice Program'' to furnish
hospital care and medical services to veterans enrolled in the system of
patient enrollment established under section 1705(a) of title 38, United
States Code, at non-Department facilities.
(b) Elements.--The plan developed under subsection (a) to establish
the Veterans Choice Program to furnish hospital care and medical
services at non-Department facilities shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) A standardized method to furnish such care and services
that incorporates the strengths of the non-Department provider
programs into a single streamlined program that the Secretary
administers uniformly in each Veterans Service Integrated
Network and throughout the medical system of the Veterans Health
Administration.
(2) An identification of the eligibility requirements for
any such care and services, including with respect to service-
connected disabilities and non-service-connected disabilities.
(3) A description of the authorization process for such care
or medical services, including with respect to identifying the
roles of clinicians, schedulers, any third-party administrators,
the Chief Business Office of the Department, and any other
entity involved in the authorization process.
(4) The structuring of the billing and reimbursement
process, including the use of third-party medical claims
adjudicators or technology that supports automatic adjudication.
(5) A description of the reimbursement rate to be paid to
health care providers under such program.
(6) An identification of how the Secretary will determine
the eligibility requirements of health care providers at non-
Department facilities to participate in such program, including
how the Secretary plans to structure a non-Department care
network to allow the maximum amount of flexibility in providing
care and services under the program.
(7) An explanation of the processes to be used to ensure
that the Secretary will fully comply with all requirements of
chapter 39 of title 31, United States Code (commonly referred to
as the ``Prompt Payment Act''), in paying for such care and
services furnished at non-Department facilities.
(8) A description of how, to the greatest extent
practicable, the Secretary plans to use infrastructure and
networks of non-Department provider programs that exist as of
the date of the plan to implement such program.
(9) A description of how--
(A) health care providers at non-Department
facilities that furnish such care or services to
veterans under such program will have access to, and
transmit back to the Department, the medical records of
such veterans; and
(B) the Department will receive from such non-
Department providers such medical records and any other
relevant information.

[[Page 462]]

(10) A description of how the Secretary plans to ensure an
efficient transition to such program for veterans who
participate in the non-Department provider programs, including a
timeline, milestones, and estimated costs for implementation,
outreach, and training.

(c) <> Submission.--Not later than November 1, 2015,
the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the
House of Representatives and the Senate a report containing--
(1) a description of each non-Department provider program
and the statutory authority for each such program;
(2) the plan under subsection (a);
(3) <>  the estimated costs and
budgetary requirements to implement the plan and to furnish
hospital care and medical services pursuant to such plan; and
(4) <> any recommendations for
legislative proposals the Secretary determines necessary to
implement such plan.

(d) Definitions.--In this section:
(1) The term ``non-Department facility'' has the meaning
given that term in section 1701 of title 38, United States Code.
(2) The term ``non-Department provider programs'' means each
program administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs under
which the Secretary enters into contracts or other agreements
with health care providers at non-Department facilities to
furnish hospital care and medical services to veterans,
including pursuant to the following:
(A) Section 1703 of title 38, United States Code.
(B) The Veterans Choice Program established by
section 101 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and
Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113-146; 38
U.S.C. 1701 note).
(C) The Patient Centered Community Care Program
(known as ``PC3'').
(D) The pilot program established by section 403 of
the Veterans' Mental Health and Other Care Improvements
Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-387; 38 U.S.C. 1703 note)
(known as ``Project ARCH'').
(E) Contracts relating to dialysis.
(F) Agreements entered into by the Secretary with--
(i) the Secretary of Defense, the Director of
the Indian Health Service, or any the head of any
other department or agency of the Federal
Government; or
(ii) any academic affiliate or other non-
governmental entity.
(G) Programs relating to emergency care, including
under sections 1725 and 1728 of title 38, United States
Code.
SEC. 4003. <> FUNDING ACCOUNT FOR NON-
DEPARTMENT CARE.

Each budget of the President submitted to Congress under section
1105 of title 31, United States Code, for fiscal year 2017 and each
fiscal year thereafter shall include an appropriations account for non-
Department provider programs (as defined in section 2(d)) to be
comprised of--
(1) discretionary medical services funding that is
designated for hospital care and medical services furnished at
non-Department facilities; and

[[Page 463]]

(2) any funds transferred for such purpose from the Veterans
Choice Fund established by section 802 of the Veterans Access,
Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113-146; 128
Stat. 1802).
SEC. 4004. TEMPORARY AUTHORIZATION OF USE OF VETERANS CHOICE FUNDS
FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS.

(a) In General.--Subsection (c) of section 802 of the Veterans
Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113-146; 128
Stat. 1802) <> is amended--
(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Any amounts'' and
inserting ``Except as provided by paragraph (3), any amounts'';
and
(2) by adding at the end the following paragraph:
``(3) Temporary authority for other uses.--
``(A) Other non-department care.--In addition to the
use of amounts described in paragraph (1), of the
amounts deposited in the Veterans Choice Fund, not more
than $3,348,500,000 may be used by the Secretary during
the period described in subparagraph (C) for amounts
obligated by the Secretary on or after May 1, 2015, to
furnish health care to individuals pursuant to chapter
17 of title 38, United States Code, at non-Department
facilities, including pursuant to non-Department
provider programs other than the program established by
section 101.
``(B) Hepatitis c.--Of the amount specified in
subparagraph (A), not more than $500,000,000 may be used
by the Secretary during the period described in
subparagraph (C) for pharmaceutical expenses relating to
the treatment of Hepatitis C.
``(C) Period described.--The period described in
this subparagraph is the period beginning on the date of
the enactment of the VA Budget and Choice Improvement
Act and ending on October 1, 2015.
``(D) Reports.--Not later than 14 days after the
date of the enactment of the VA Budget and Choice
Improvement Act, and not less frequently than once every
14-day period thereafter during the period described in
subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall submit to the
appropriate congressional committees a report
detailing--
``(i) the amounts used by the Secretary
pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and (B); and
``(ii) an identification of such amounts
listed by the non-Department provider program for
which the amounts were used.
``(E) Definitions.--In this paragraph:
``(i) The term `appropriate congressional
committees' means--
``(I) the Committee on Veterans'
Affairs and the Committee on
Appropriations of the House of
Representatives; and
``(II) the Committee on Veterans'
Affairs and the Committee on
Appropriations of the Senate.
``(ii) The term `non-Department facilities'
has the meaning given that term in section 1701 of
title 38, United States Code.

[[Page 464]]

``(iii) The term `non-Department provider
program' has the meaning given that term in
section 4002(d) of the VA Budget and Choice
Improvement Act.''.

(b) Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (d)(1) of such <> section is amended by inserting before the period at the
end the following: ``(or for hospital care and medical services pursuant
to subsection (c)(3) of this section)''.
SEC. 4005. MODIFICATIONS OF VETERANS CHOICE PROGRAM.

(a) Increased Period of Follow-Up Care.--Subsection (h) of section
101 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014
(Public Law 113-146; 38 U.S.C. 1701 note) is amended by striking ``(but
for a period not exceeding 60 days)''.
(b) Expansion of Eligibility.--Such section is further amended--
(1) by striking paragraph (1) of subsection (b) and
inserting the following new paragraph:
``(1) the veteran is enrolled in the patient enrollment
system of the Department of Veterans Affairs established and
operated under section 1705 of title 38, United States Code,
including any such veteran who has not received hospital care or
medical services from the Department and has contacted the
Department seeking an initial appointment from the Department
for the receipt of such care or services; and''; and
(2) in subsection (g)(1), by striking ``In the case'' and
all that follows through ``, when'' and insert ``When''.

(c) Expansion of Providers.--Such section is further amended--
(1) in subsection (a)(1)(B), by adding at the end the
following new clause:
``(v) Subject to subsection (d)(5), a health
care provider not otherwise covered under any of
clauses (i) through (iv).''; and
(2) in subsection (d), by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
``(5) <> Agreements with other providers.--
In accordance with the rates determined pursuant to paragraph
(2), the Secretary may enter into agreements under paragraph (1)
for furnishing care and services to eligible veterans under this
section with an entity specified in subsection (a)(1)(B)(v) if
the entity meets criteria established by the Secretary for
purposes of this section.''.

(d) Clarification of Wait Times.--Subparagraph (A) of subsection
(b)(2) of such section is amended to read as follows:
``(A) attempts, or has attempted, to schedule an
appointment for the receipt of hospital care or medical
services under chapter 17 of title 38, United States
Code, but is unable to schedule an appointment within--
``(i) the wait-time goals of the Veterans
Health Administration for the furnishing of such
care or services; or
``(ii) with respect to such care or services
that are clinically necessary, the period
determined necessary for such care or services if
such period is shorter than such wait-time
goals;''.

[[Page 465]]

(e) Modification of Distance Requirement.--Subparagraph (B) of
subsection (b)(2) of such section <> is amended
to read as follows:
``(B) resides more than 40 miles (as calculated
based on distance traveled) from--
``(i) with respect to a veteran who is seeking
primary care, a medical facility of the
Department, including a community-based outpatient
clinic, that is able to provide such primary care
by a full-time primary care physician; or
``(ii) with respect to a veteran not covered
under clause (i), the medical facility of the
Department, including a community-based outpatient
clinic, that is closest to the residence of the
veteran;''.
SEC. 4006. <> LIMITATION ON DIALYSIS
PILOT PROGRAM.

(a) Limitation.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated or
otherwise made available to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may be
used to expand the dialysis pilot program or to create any new dialysis
capability provided by the Department in a facility that is not an
initial facility under the dialysis pilot program until--
(1) <> an independent analysis of the
dialysis pilot program is conducted for each such initial
facility;
(2) <> the Secretary submits to the
appropriate congressional committees the report under subsection
(b); and
(3) <> a period of 180 days has elapsed
following the date on which the Secretary submits such report.

(b) Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the appropriate
congressional committees a report containing the following:
(1) The independent analysis described in subsection (a)(1).
(2) <> A five-year dialysis
investment plan explaining all of the options of the Secretary
for delivering dialysis care to veterans, including how and
where such care will be delivered.

(c) Definitions.--In this section:
(1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees''
means--
(A) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the
Committee on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives; and
(B) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the
Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
(2) The term ``dialysis pilot program'' means the pilot
demonstration program approved by the Under Secretary of
Veterans Affairs for Health in August 2010 and by the Secretary
of Veterans Affairs in September 2010 to provide dialysis care
to patients at certain outpatient facilities operated by the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
(3) The term ``initial facility'' means one of the four
outpatient facilities identified by the Secretary to participate
in the dialysis pilot program prior to the date of the enactment
of this Act.
SEC. 4007. AMENDMENTS TO INTERNAL REVENUE CODE WITH RESPECT TO
HEALTH COVERAGE OF VETERANS.

(a) Exemption in Determination of Employer Health Insurance
Mandate.--

[[Page 466]]

(1) In general.--Section 4980H(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 <> is amended by adding at the
end the following:
``(F) Exemption for health coverage under tricare or
the veterans administration.--Solely for purposes of
determining whether an employer is an applicable large
employer under this paragraph for any month, an
individual shall not be taken into account as an
employee for such month if such individual has medical
coverage for such month under--
``(i) chapter 55 of title 10, United States
Code, including coverage under the TRICARE
program, or
``(ii) under a health care program under
chapter 17 or 18 of title 38, United States Code,
as determined by the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs, in coordination with the Secretary of
Health and Human Services and the Secretary.''.
(2) <> Effective
date.--The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
months beginning after December 31, 2013.

(b) Eligibility for Health Savings Account Not Affected by Receipt
of Medical Care for Service-Connected Disability.--
(1) In general.--Section 223(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new
subparagraph:
``(C) Special rule for individuals eligible for
certain veterans benefits.--An individual shall not fail
to be treated as an eligible individual for any period
merely because the individual receives hospital care or
medical services under any law administered by the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs for a service-connected
disability (within the meaning of section 101(16) of
title 38, United States Code).''.
(2) <> Effective
date.--The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to
months beginning after December 31, 2015.
SEC. 4008. EMERGENCY DESIGNATIONS.

(a) In General.--This title, except for section 4007, is designated
as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 4(g) of the Statutory
Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010 (2 U.S.C. 933(g)).

[[Page 467]]

(b) Designation in Senate.--In the Senate, this title, except for
section 4007, is designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to
section 403(a) of S. Con. Res. 13 (111th Congress), the concurrent
resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2010.

Approved July 31, 2015.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--H.R. 3236:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 161 (2015):
July 29, considered and passed House.
July 30, considered and passed Senate.
DAILY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS (2015):
July 31, Presidential remarks.

[United States Statutes at Large, Volume 129, 114th Congress, 1st Session]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov]


Public Law 114-2
114th Congress

An Act


 
To direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide for the conduct
of annual evaluations of mental health care and suicide prevention
programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs, to require a pilot
program on loan repayment for psychiatrists who agree to serve in the
Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs,
and for other purposes. <>

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, <>
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ``Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention for
American Veterans Act'' or the ``Clay Hunt SAV Act''.
SEC. 2. EVALUATIONS OF MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND SUICIDE PREVENTION
PROGRAMS OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

(a) Evaluations.--
(1) In general.--Subchapter I of chapter 17 of title 38,
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the
following new section:
``Sec. 1709B. <>  Evaluations of mental
health care and suicide prevention programs

``(a) <>  Evaluations.--(1) Not less frequently
than once during each period specified in paragraph (3), the Secretary
shall provide for the conduct of an evaluation of the mental health care
and suicide prevention programs carried out under the laws administered
by the Secretary.

``(2) Each evaluation conducted under paragraph (1) shall--
``(A) use metrics that are common among and useful for
practitioners in the field of mental health care and suicide
prevention;
``(B) identify the most effective mental health care and
suicide prevention programs conducted by the Secretary,
including such programs conducted at a Center of Excellence;
``(C) identify the cost-effectiveness of each program
identified under subparagraph (B);
``(D) measure the satisfaction of patients with respect to
the care provided under each such program; and
``(E) propose best practices for caring for individuals who
suffer from mental health disorders or are at risk of suicide,
including such practices conducted or suggested by other
departments or agencies of the Federal Government, including the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration of the
Department of Health and Human Services.

[[Page 31]]

``(3) <>  The periods specified in this
paragraph are the following:
``(A) The period beginning on the date on which the
Secretary awards the contract under paragraph (4) and ending on
September 30, 2018.
``(B) <>  Each fiscal year beginning
on or after October 1, 2018.

``(4) <>  Not later than 180 days after
the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall seek to
enter into a contract with an independent third party unaffiliated with
the Department of Veterans Affairs to conduct evaluations under
paragraph (1).

``(5) The independent third party that is awarded the contract under
paragraph (4) shall submit to the Secretary each evaluation conducted
under paragraph (1).
``(b) <>  Annual Submission.--Not later
than December 1, 2018, and each year thereafter, the Secretary shall
submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the
Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives a report
that contains the following:
``(1) The most recent evaluations submitted to the Secretary
under subsection (a)(5) that the Secretary has not previously
submitted to such Committees.
``(2) Any recommendations the Secretary considers
appropriate.''.
(2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the
beginning of such chapter <>  is
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1709A
the following new item:

``1709B. Evaluations of mental health care and suicide prevention
programs.''.

(b) <>  Interim Reports.--Not later than
September 30 of each of 2016 and 2017, the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs, in coordination with the independent third party awarded a
contract by the Secretary pursuant to section 1709B(a)(4) of title 38,
United States Code, as added by subsection (a)(1), shall submit to the
Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on
Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the mental
health care and suicide prevention programs carried out under the laws
administered by the Secretary that includes, with respect to each such
program, the following:
(1) A description of the program.
(2) The number of veterans served by the program.
(3) The budget of the program.
(4) The number of full-time equivalent employees assigned to
the program.
(5) Whether veterans may repeat participation in the program
or participate in the program in addition to other similar
programs.
(6) Any study results or research published regarding the
efficacy of the program.
(7) Any other information the Secretary determines
appropriate.
SEC. 3. <>  PUBLICATION OF INTERNET
WEBSITE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION REGARDING
MENTAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

(a) <>  In General.--Using funds made available to
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to publish the Internet websites of
the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Secretary shall survey the
existing Internet websites and information resources of the Department

[[Page 32]]

to publish an Internet website that serves as a centralized source to
provide veterans with information regarding all of the mental health
care services provided by the Secretary.

(b) Elements.--The Internet website published under subsection (a)
shall provide to veterans information regarding all of the mental health
care services available in the Veteran Integrated Service Network that
the veteran is seeking such services, including, with respect to each
medical center, Vet Center (as defined in section 1712A of title 38,
United States Code), and community-based outpatient center in the
Veterans Integrated Service Network--
(1) the name and contact information of each social work
office;
(2) the name and contact information of each mental health
clinic;
(3) a list of appropriate staff; and
(4) any other information the Secretary determines
appropriate.

(c) <>  Updated Information.--The Secretary shall
ensure that the information described in subsection (b) that is
published on the Internet website under subsection (a) is updated not
less than once every 90 days.

(d) Outreach.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall
ensure that the outreach conducted under section 1720F(i) of title 38,
United States Code, includes information regarding the Internet website
published under subsection (a).
SEC. 4. <>  PILOT PROGRAM FOR REPAYMENT
OF EDUCATIONAL LOANS FOR CERTAIN PSYCHIATRISTS
OF VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.

(a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry
out a pilot program to repay loans of individuals described in
subsection (b) that--
(1) were used by such individuals to finance education
relating to psychiatric medicine, including education leading
to--
(A) a degree of doctor of medicine; or
(B) a degree of doctor of osteopathy; and
(2) were obtained from any of the following:
(A) A governmental entity.
(B) A private financial institution.
(C) A school.
(D) Any other authorized entity as determined by the
Secretary.

(b) Eligible Individuals.--
(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an individual
eligible for participation in the pilot program is an individual
who--
(A) either--
(i) is licensed or eligible for licensure to
practice psychiatric medicine in the Veterans
Health Administration of the Department of
Veterans Affairs; or
(ii) is enrolled in the final year of a
residency program leading to a specialty
qualification in psychiatric medicine that is
approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education; and

[[Page 33]]

(B) demonstrates a commitment to a long-term career
as a psychiatrist in the Veterans Health Administration,
as determined by the Secretary.
(2) Prohibition on simultaneous eligibility.--An individual
who is participating in any other program of the Federal
Government that repays the educational loans of the individual
is not eligible to participate in the pilot program.

(c) Selection.--The Secretary shall select not less than 10
individuals described in subsection (b) to participate in the pilot
program for each year in which the Secretary carries out the pilot
program.
(d) <>  Period of Obligated Service.--The
Secretary shall enter into an agreement with each individual selected
under subsection (c) in which such individual agrees to serve a period
of 2 or more years of obligated service for the Veterans Health
Administration in the field of psychiatric medicine, as determined by
the Secretary.

(e) Loan Repayments.--
(1) Amounts.--Subject to paragraph (2), a loan repayment
under this section may consist of payment of the principal,
interest, and related expenses of a loan obtained by an
individual who is participating in the pilot program for all
educational expenses (including tuition, fees, books, and
laboratory expenses) of such individual relating to education
described in subsection (a)(1).
(2) Limit.--For each year of obligated service that an
individual who is participating in the pilot program agrees to
serve under subsection (d), the Secretary may pay not more than
$30,000 in loan repayment on behalf of such individual.

(f) Breach.--
(1) Liability.--An individual who participates in the pilot
program and fails to satisfy the period of obligated service
under subsection (d) shall be liable to the United States, in
lieu of such obligated service, for the amount that has been
paid or is payable to or on behalf of the individual under the
pilot program, reduced by the proportion that the number of days
served for completion of the period of obligated service bears
to the total number of days in the period of obligated service
of such individual.
(2) Repayment period.--Any amount of damages that the United
States is entitled to recover under this subsection shall be
paid to the United States not later than 1 year after the date
of the breach of the agreement.

(g) Report.--
(1) Initial report.--Not later than 2 years after the date
on which the pilot program under subsection (a) commences, the
Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House
of Representatives a report on the pilot program.
(2) Elements.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall
include the following:
(A) The number of individuals who participated in
the pilot program, including the number of new hires.
(B) The locations in which such individuals were
employed by the Department, including how many such
locations were rural or urban locations.

[[Page 34]]

(C) <>  An assessment of the
quality of the work performed by such individuals in the
course of such employment, including the performance
reviews of such individuals.
(D) <>  The number of
psychiatrists the Secretary determines is needed by the
Department in the future.
(3) Final report.--Not later than 90 days before the date on
which the pilot program terminates under subsection (i), the
Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House
of Representatives an update to the report submitted under
paragraph (1) and any recommendations that the Secretary
considers appropriate.

(h) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry
out this section, including standards for qualified loans and authorized
payees and other terms and conditions for the making of loan repayments.
(i) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program shall
expire on the date that is 3 years after the date on which the Secretary
commences the pilot program.
SEC. 5. <>  PILOT PROGRAM ON COMMUNITY
OUTREACH.

(a) In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish a
pilot program to assist veterans transitioning from serving on active
duty and to improve the access of veterans to mental health services.
(b) Locations.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program
under subsection (a) at not less than five Veterans Integrated Service
Networks that have a large population of veterans who--
(1) served in the reserve components of the Armed Forces; or
(2) are transitioning into communities with an established
population of veterans after having recently separated from the
Armed Forces.

(c) Functions.--The pilot program at each Veterans Integrated
Service Network described in subsection (b) shall include the following:
(1) A community oriented veteran peer support network,
carried out in partnership with an appropriate entity with
experience in peer support programs, that--
(A) establishes peer support training guidelines;
(B) develops a network of veteran peer support
counselors to meet the demands of the communities in the
Veterans Integrated Service Network;
(C) conducts training of veteran peer support
counselors;
(D) with respect to one medical center selected by
the Secretary in each such Veterans Integrated Service
Network, has--
(i) a designated peer support specialist who
acts as a liaison to the community oriented
veteran peer network; and
(ii) a certified mental health professional
designated as the community oriented veteran peer
network mentor; and
(E) is readily available to veterans, including
pursuant to the Veterans Integrated Service Network
cooperating

[[Page 35]]

and working with State and local governments and
appropriate entities.
(2) A community outreach team for each medical center
selected by the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (1)(D) that--
(A) assists veterans transitioning into communities;
(B) establishes a veteran transition advisory group
to facilitate outreach activities;
(C) includes the participation of appropriate
community organizations, State and local governments,
colleges and universities, chambers of commerce and
other local business organizations, and organizations
that provide legal aid or advice; and
(D) coordinates with the Veterans Integrated Service
Network regarding the Veterans Integrated Service
Network carrying out an annual mental health summit to
assess the status of veteran mental health care in the
community and to develop new or innovative means to
provide mental health services to veterans.

(d) Reports.--
(1) Initial report.--Not later than 18 months after the date
on which the pilot program under subsection (a) commences, the
Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House
of Representatives a report on the pilot program. With respect
to each Veterans Integrated Service Network described in
subsection (b), the report shall include--
(A) a full description of the peer support model
implemented under the pilot program, participation data,
and data pertaining to past and current mental health
related hospitalizations and fatalities;
(B) <>  recommendations on
implementing peer support networks throughout the
Department;
(C) whether the mental health resources made
available under the pilot program for members of the
reserve components of the Armed Forces is effective; and
(D) a full description of the activities and
effectiveness of community outreach coordinating teams
under the pilot program, including partnerships that
have been established with appropriate entities.
(2) Final report.--Not later than 90 days before the date on
which the pilot program terminates under subsection (e), the
Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House
of Representatives an update to the report submitted under
paragraph (1).

(e) Construction.--This section may not be construed to authorize
the Secretary to hire additional employees of the Department to carry
out the pilot program under subsection (a).
(f) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary to carry out the
pilot program under subsection (a) shall terminate on the date that is 3
years after the date on which the pilot program commences.

[[Page 36]]

SEC. 6. <>  COLLABORATION ON SUICIDE
PREVENTION EFFORTS BETWEEN DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS AND NON-PROFIT MENTAL HEALTH
ORGANIZATIONS.

(a) Collaboration.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may
collaborate with non-profit mental health organizations to prevent
suicide among veterans as follows:
(1) To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of suicide
prevention efforts carried out by the Secretary and non-profit
mental health organizations.
(2) To assist non-profit mental health organizations with
the suicide prevention efforts of such organizations through the
use of the expertise of employees of the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
(3) To jointly carry out suicide prevention efforts.

(b) Exchange of Resources.--In carrying out any collaboration under
subsection (a), the Secretary and any non-profit mental health
organization with which the Secretary is collaborating under such
subsection shall exchange training sessions and best practices to help
with the suicide prevention efforts of the Department and such
organization.
(c) Director of Suicide Prevention Coordination.--The Secretary
shall select within the Department a Director of Suicide Prevention
Coordination to undertake any collaboration with non-profit mental
health organizations under this section or any other provision of law.
SEC. 7. ADDITIONAL PERIOD OF ELIGIBILITY FOR HEALTH CARE FOR
CERTAIN VETERANS OF COMBAT SERVICE DURING
CERTAIN PERIODS OF HOSTILITIES AND WAR.

Paragraph (3) of section 1710(e) of title 38, United States Code, is
amended to read as follows:
``(3) In the case of care for a veteran described in paragraph
(1)(D), hospital care, medical services, and nursing home care may be
provided under or by virtue of subsection (a)(2)(F) only during the
following periods:
``(A) Except as provided by subparagraph (B), with respect
to a veteran described in paragraph (1)(D) who is discharged or
released from the active military, naval, or air service after
January 27, 2003, the five-year period beginning on the date of
such discharge or release.
``(B) <>  With respect to a veteran
described in paragraph (1)(D) who is discharged or released from
the active military, naval, or air service after January 1,
2009, and before January 1, 2011, but did not enroll to receive
such hospital care, medical services, or nursing home care
pursuant to such paragraph during the five-year period described
in subparagraph (A), the one-year period beginning on the date
of the enactment of the Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention for
American Veterans Act.
``(C) With respect to a veteran described in paragraph
(1)(D) who is discharged or released from the active military,
naval, or air service on or before January 27, 2003, and did not
enroll in the patient enrollment system under section 1705 of
this title on or before such date, the three-year period
beginning on January 27, 2008.''.

[[Page 37]]

SEC. 8. PROHIBITION ON NEW APPROPRIATIONS.

No additional funds are authorized to be appropriated to carry out
this Act and the amendments made by this Act, and this Act and such
amendments shall be carried out using amounts otherwise made available
for such purposes.

Approved February 12, 2015.

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY--H.R. 203:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

SENATE REPORTS: No. 114-34 (Comm. on Veterans' Affairs).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 161 (2015):
Jan. 12, considered and passed House.
Feb. 3, considered and passed Senate.
DAILY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS (2015):
Feb. 12, Presidential remarks.

[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 2778 Introduced in House (IH)]

111th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                H. R. 2778

  To amend the Public Health Service Act to redesignate the National 
   Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities as the National 
  Institute for Minority Health and Health Disparities, and for other 
                               purposes.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                              June 9, 2009

 Mr. Jackson of Illinois (for himself and Mr. Cummings) introduced the 
   following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and 
                                Commerce

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
  To amend the Public Health Service Act to redesignate the National 
   Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities as the National 
  Institute for Minority Health and Health Disparities, and for other 
                               purposes.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Health Equity and Accountability 
through Research Act of 2009''.

SEC. 2. NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR MINORITY HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES.

    (a) Redesignation.--
            (1) In general.--Title IV of the Public Health Service Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 281 et seq.) is amended--
                    (A) in section 401(b)(24), by striking ``National 
                Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities'' and 
                inserting ``National Institute for Minority Health and 
                Health Disparities''; and
                    (B) in subpart 6 of part E--
                            (i) in the subpart heading, by striking 
                        ``Center'' and inserting ``Institute'';
                            (ii) in the headings of sections 485E and 
                        485H, by striking ``center'' and inserting 
                        ``institute''; and
                            (iii) by striking (other than in section 
                        485E(i)(1)) the term ``Center'' each place it 
                        appears and inserting ``Institute''.
            (2) References.--Any reference in any law, map, regulation, 
        document, paper, or other record of the United States to the 
        National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities shall 
        be deemed to be a reference to the National Institute for 
        Minority Health and Health Disparities.
    (b) Duties; Authorities; Funding.--Section 485E of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 287c-31) is amended--
            (1) by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:
    ``(e) Duties of the Director.--
            ``(1) Interagency coordination of minority health and 
        health disparity activities.--With respect to minority health 
        and health disparities, the Director of the Institute shall 
        plan, coordinate, and evaluate research and other activities 
        conducted or supported by the institutes and centers of the 
        National Institutes of Health. In carrying out the preceding 
        sentence, the Director of the Institute shall evaluate the 
        minority health and health disparity activities of each of such 
        institutes and centers and shall provide for the periodic 
        reevaluation of such activities. Such institutes and centers 
        shall be responsible for providing information to the 
        Institute, including data on clinical trials funded or 
        conducted by these institutes and centers.
            ``(2) Consultations.--The Director of the Institute shall 
        carry out this subpart (including developing and revising the 
        plan and budget required by subsection (f) in consultation with 
        the heads of the institutes and centers of the National 
        Institutes of Health, the advisory councils of such institutes 
        and centers, and the advisory council established pursuant to 
        subsection (j).
            ``(3) Coordination of activities.--The Director of the 
        Institute--
                    ``(A) shall act as the primary Federal official 
                with responsibility for coordinating all research and 
                activities conducted or supported by the National 
                Institutes of Health on minority or other health 
                disparities;
                    ``(B) shall represent the health disparities 
                research program of the National Institutes of Health, 
                including the minority health and other health 
                disparities research program, at all relevant executive 
                branch task forces, committees, and planning 
                activities; and
                    ``(C) shall maintain communications with all 
                relevant agencies of the Public Health Service, 
                including the Indian Health Service, and various other 
                departments and agencies of the Federal Government to 
                ensure the timely transmission of information 
                concerning advances in minority health disparities 
                research and other health disparities research among 
                these various agencies for dissemination to affected 
                communities and health care providers.'';
            (2) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
    ``(f) Strategic Plan.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this 
        section and other applicable law, the Director of the 
        Institute, in consultation with the Director of NIH, the 
        Directors of the other institutes and centers of the National 
        Institutes of Health, and the advisory council established 
        pursuant to subsection (j), shall--
                    ``(A) annually review and revise a strategic plan 
                (referred to in this section as `the plan') and budget 
                for the conduct and support of all minority health 
                disparity research and other health disparity research 
                activities of the institutes and centers of the 
                National Institutes of Health that include time-based 
                targeted objectives with measurable outcomes and assure 
                that the annual review and revision of the plan uses an 
                established trans-National Institutes of Health process 
                subject to timely review, approval, and dissemination;
                    ``(B) ensure that the plan and budget establish 
                priorities among the health disparities research 
                activities that such agencies are authorized to carry 
                out;
                    ``(C) ensure that the plan and budget establish 
                objectives regarding such activities, describe the 
                means for achieving the objectives, and designate the 
                date by which the objectives are expected to be 
                achieved;
                    ``(D) ensure that all amounts appropriated for such 
                activities are expended in accordance with the plan and 
                budget;
                    ``(E) annually submit to Congress a report on the 
                progress made with respect to the plan; and
                    ``(F) create and implement a plan for the systemic 
                review of research activities supported by the National 
                Institutes of Health that are within the mission of 
                both the Institute and other institutes and centers of 
                the National Institutes of Health, including by 
                establishing mechanisms for--
                            ``(i) tracking minority health and health 
                        disparity research conducted within the 
                        institutes and centers assessing the 
                        appropriateness of this research with regard to 
                        the overall goals and objectives of the plan;
                            ``(ii) the early identification of 
                        applications and proposals for grants, 
                        contracts, and cooperative agreements 
                        supporting extramural training, research, and 
                        development, that are submitted to the 
                        institutes and centers that are within the 
                        mission of the Institute;
                            ``(iii) providing the Institute with the 
                        written descriptions and scientific peer review 
                        results of such applications and proposals;
                            ``(iv) enabling the institutes and centers 
                        to consult with the Director of the Institute 
                        prior to final approval of such applications 
                        and proposals; and
                            ``(v) reporting to the Director of the 
                        Institute all such applications and proposals 
                        that are approved for funding by the institutes 
                        and centers.
            ``(2) Certain components of plan and budget.--With respect 
        to health disparities research activities of the agencies of 
        the National Institutes of Health, the Director of the 
        Institute shall ensure that the plan and budget under paragraph 
        (1) provide for--
                    ``(A) basic research and applied research, 
                including research and development with respect to 
                products;
                    ``(B) research that is conducted by the agencies;
                    ``(C) research that is supported by the agencies;
                    ``(D) proposals developed pursuant to solicitations 
                by the agencies and for proposals developed 
                independently of such solicitations; and
                    ``(E) behavioral research and social sciences 
                research, which may include cultural and linguistic 
                research in each of the agencies.
            ``(3) Minority health disparities research.--The plan and 
        budget under paragraph (1) shall include a separate statement 
        of the plan and budget for minority health disparities 
        research.'';
            (3) by amending subsection (h) to read as follows:
    ``(h) Research Endowments.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Institute shall 
        carry out a program to facilitate minority health and health 
        disparities research and other health disparities research by 
        providing research endowments at--
                    ``(A) centers of excellence under section 736; and
                    ``(B) centers of excellence under section 485F.
            ``(2) Eligibility.--The Director of the Institute shall 
        provide for a research endowment under paragraph (1) only if 
        the institution involved meets the following conditions:
                    ``(A) The institution does not have an endowment 
                that is worth in excess of an amount equal to 50 
                percent of the national average of endowment funds at 
                institutions that conduct similar biomedical research 
                or training of health professionals.
                    ``(B) The application of the institution under 
                paragraph (1) regarding a research endowment has been 
                recommended pursuant to technical and scientific peer 
                review and has been approved by the advisory council 
                established pursuant to subsection (j).
                    ``(C) The institution at any time was deemed to be 
                eligible to receive a grant under section 736 and at 
                any time received a research endowment under paragraph 
                (1).''; and
            (4) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(k) Funding.--
            ``(1) Full funding budget.--
                    ``(A) In general.--With respect to a fiscal year, 
                the Director of the Institute shall prepare and submit 
                directly to the President, for review and transmittal 
                to Congress, a budget estimate for carrying out the 
                plan for the fiscal year, after reasonable opportunity 
                for comment (but without change) by the Secretary, the 
                Director of the National Institutes of Health, the 
                directors of the other institutes and centers of the 
                National Institutes of Health, and the advisory council 
                established pursuant to subsection (j). The budget 
                estimate shall include an estimate of the number and 
                type of personnel needs for the Institute.
                    ``(B) Amounts necessary.--The budget estimate 
                submitted under subparagraph (A) shall estimate the 
                amounts necessary for the institutes and centers of the 
                National Institutes of Health to carry out all minority 
                health and health disparities activities determined by 
                the Director of the Institute to be appropriate, 
                without regard to the probability that such amounts 
                will be appropriated.
            ``(2) Alternate budgets.--
                    ``(A) In general.--With respect to a fiscal year, 
                the Director of the Institute shall prepare and submit 
                to the Secretary and the Director of the National 
                Institutes of Health the budget estimates described in 
                subparagraph (B) for carrying out the plan for the 
                fiscal year. The Secretary and such Director shall 
                consider each of such estimates in making 
                recommendations to the President regarding a budget for 
                the plan for such year.
                    ``(B) Description.--With respect to the fiscal year 
                involved, the budget estimates referred to in 
                subparagraph (A) for the plan are as follows:
                            ``(i) The budget estimate submitted under 
                        paragraph (1).
                            ``(ii) A budget estimate developed on the 
                        assumption that the amounts appropriated will 
                        be sufficient only for--
                                    ``(I) continuing the conduct by the 
                                institutes and centers of the National 
                                Institutes of Health of existing 
                                minority health and health disparity 
                                activities (if approved for 
                                continuation), and continuing the 
                                support of such activities by the 
                                institutes and centers in the case of 
                                projects or programs for which the 
                                institutes or centers have made a 
                                commitment of continued support; and
                                    ``(II) carrying out activities that 
                                are in addition to activities specified 
                                in subclause (I), only for which the 
                                Director determines there is the most 
                                substantial need.
                            ``(iii) Such other budget estimates as the 
                        Director of the Institute determines to be 
                        appropriate.
    ``(l) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2010 and such sums as may 
be necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2014, to carry out 
this section.''.
                                 <all>

[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1667 Reported in House (RH)]

<DOC>





                                                 Union Calendar No. 154
117th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                H. R. 1667

                          [Report No. 117-213]

     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                             March 8, 2021

Ms. Wild (for herself, Mr. McKinley, Mr. Krishnamoorthi, Mr. Upton, Ms. 
  Chu, Mr. Griffith, Ms. Stevens, Mr. Fitzpatrick, Mr. Case, Mr. Van 
Drew, Mrs. Napolitano, Mr. Timmons, Mr. Suozzi, Ms. Lee of California, 
 and Mr. Stanton) introduced the following bill; which was referred to 
                  the Committee on Energy and Commerce

                            December 8, 2021

  Additional sponsors: Mr. Katko, Ms. Ross, Ms. Meng, Ms. Newman, Mr. 
Cleaver, Mrs. Luria, Mr. Mrvan, Ms. Scanlon, Ms. Davids of Kansas, Ms. 
 Sewell, Ms. Roybal-Allard, Mr. Raskin, Mr. Grijalva, Ms. Norton, Mr. 
 DeSaulnier, Mr. Trone, Mr. Auchincloss, Ms. Strickland, Mr. Bera, Mr. 
 Malinowski, Mr. Rodney Davis of Illinois, Mrs. Axne, Ms. DelBene, Ms. 
  Schrier, Mrs. Watson Coleman, Mr. Carbajal, Ms. Omar, Mr. Hill, Mr. 
Carson, Mr. Pocan, Ms. Manning, Ms. McCollum, Mr. Yarmuth, Mr. Bucshon, 
   Ms. Pingree, Mr. Cohen, Mr. Rush, Ms. Schakowsky, Mr. Lynch, Mr. 
O'Halleran, Mr. DeFazio, Mr. Connolly, Mr. Bishop of Georgia, Ms. Dean, 
 Mr. Garcia of Illinois, Mr. Mann, Mr. Lamb, Mr. Levin of California, 
    Mr. Tonko, Mr. Vela, Ms. Underwood, Mr. Foster, Mr. Bacon, Mr. 
 Sarbanes, Mr. Joyce of Ohio, Ms. Porter, Mrs. Trahan, Mr. Higgins of 
New York, Mrs. Murphy of Florida, Mr. Ruppersberger, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, 
 Mr. Moulton, Ms. Craig, Mr. Bilirakis, Mr. Cardenas, Mr. Burgess, Mr. 
Kinzinger, Mr. Emmer, Ms. Blunt Rochester, Mr. Blumenauer, Ms. Kuster, 
Ms. Johnson of Texas, Mr. Neguse, Mrs. Demings, Mr. Kilmer, Mr. Larson 
of Connecticut, Ms. DeGette, Mr. Posey, Ms. Barragan, Mr. Morelle, Ms. 
 Matsui, Mr. Cicilline, Mr. Thompson of California, Ms. Houlahan, Miss 
  Rice of New York, Mr. Mullin, Mr. Jacobs of New York, Miss Gonzalez-
 Colon, Mr. Harder of California, Mr. Levin of Michigan, Mr. Buchanan, 
Mr. Schneider, Mr. Langevin, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Amodei, Mr. Phillips, Mr. 
 Ruiz, Mr. Swalwell, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Lieu, Mr. Brendan F. Boyle of 
Pennsylvania, Mr. Perlmutter, Ms. Spanberger, Ms. Garcia of Texas, Mrs. 
 Carolyn B. Maloney of New York, Mr. Scott of Virginia, Mr. Evans, Mr. 
 Crist, Mrs. Dingell, Mr. Deutch, Mr. Costa, Ms. Herrera Beutler, Mr. 
 Sessions, Ms. Clarke of New York, Mr. Quigley, Mr. Soto, Mr. Bowman, 
   Ms. Bourdeaux, Mr. Casten, Mr. Schiff, Mr. Schrader, Mr. Vicente 
  Gonzalez of Texas, Mr. Pappas, Mr. Hudson, Mr. Crow, Ms. Castor of 
    Florida, Mr. Mfume, Ms. Moore of Wisconsin, Mrs. Fletcher, Mr. 
   Gottheimer, Ms. Jacobs of California, Mr. Allred, Mr. Beyer, Mrs. 
Lesko, Mr. Aguilar, Mr. Panetta, Mr. Gimenez, Mr. Kind, Mr. Nadler, Mr. 
    Smith of Washington, Mr. McGovern, Mr. Welch, Mr. Keating, Mr. 
   Espaillat, Mrs. Hayes, Mr. Garbarino, Mr. Kim of New Jersey, Ms. 
 Sanchez, Mr. Courtney, Mr. McNerney, Ms. Williams of Georgia, and Mr. 
                                  Ryan

                            December 8, 2021

  Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
       House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
                               in italic]
 [For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on March 
                                8, 2021]

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.


 


    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider 
Protection Act''.

SEC. 2. DISSEMINATION OF BEST PRACTICES.

    Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as 
the ``Secretary'') shall identify and disseminate evidence-based or 
evidence-informed best practices for preventing suicide and improving 
mental health and resiliency among health care professionals, and for 
training health care professionals in appropriate strategies to promote 
their mental health. Such best practices shall include recommendations 
related to preventing suicide and improving mental health and 
resiliency among health care professionals.

SEC. 3. EDUCATION AND AWARENESS INITIATIVE ENCOURAGING USE OF MENTAL 
              HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER SERVICES BY HEALTH CARE 
              PROFESSIONALS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with relevant 
stakeholders, including medical professional associations, shall 
establish a national evidence-based or evidence-informed education and 
awareness initiative--
            (1) to encourage health care professionals to seek support 
        and care for their mental health or substance use concerns, to 
        help such professionals identify risk factors associated with 
        suicide and mental health conditions, and to help such 
        professionals learn how best to respond to such risks, with the 
        goal of preventing suicide, mental health conditions, and 
        substance use disorders; and
            (2) to address stigma associated with seeking mental health 
        and substance use disorder services.
    (b) Reporting.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall provide to the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives an update on the 
activities and outcomes of the initiative under subsection (a), 
including a description of quantitative and qualitative metrics used to 
evaluate such activities and outcomes.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2024.

SEC. 4. PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE MENTAL HEALTH AMONG THE HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
              WORKFORCE.

    Subpart I of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C.. 294n et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 764. PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE MENTAL HEALTH AMONG THE HEALTH 
              PROFESSIONAL WORKFORCE.

    ``(a) Programs to Promote Mental Health Among Health Care 
Professionals.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants or 
        contracts to health care entities, including entities that 
        provide health care services, such as hospitals, community 
        health centers, and rural health clinics, or to medical 
        professional associations, to establish or enhance evidence-
        based or evidence-informed programs dedicated to improving 
        mental health and resiliency for health care professionals.
            ``(2) Use of funds.--An eligible entity receiving a grant 
        or contract under this subsection shall use funds received 
        through the grant or contract to implement a new program or 
        enhance an existing program to promote mental health among 
        health care professionals, which may include--
                    ``(A) improving awareness among health care 
                professionals about risk factors for, and signs of, 
                suicide and mental health or substance use disorders, 
                in accordance with evidence-based or evidence-informed 
                practices;
                    ``(B) establishing new, or enhancing existing, 
                evidence-based or evidence-informed programs for 
                preventing suicide and improving mental health and 
                resiliency among health care professionals;
                    ``(C) establishing new, or enhancing existing, 
                peer-support programs among health care professionals; 
                or
                    ``(D) providing mental health care, follow-up 
                services and care, or referral for such services and 
                care, as appropriate.
            ``(3) Priority.--In awarding grants and contracts under 
        this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible 
        entities in health professional shortage areas or rural areas.
    ``(b) Training Grants.--The Secretary may establish a program to 
award grants to health professions schools, academic health centers, 
State or local governments, Indian Tribes or Tribal organizations, or 
other appropriate public or private nonprofit entities (or consortia of 
entities, including entities promoting multidisciplinary approaches) to 
support the training of health care students, residents, or health care 
professionals in evidence-based or evidence-informed strategies to 
address mental and substance use disorders and improve mental health 
and resiliency among health care professionals.
    ``(c) Grant Terms.--A grant or contract awarded under subsection 
(a) or (b) shall be for a period of 3 years.
    ``(d) Application Submission.--An entity seeking a grant or 
contract under subsection (a) or (b) shall submit an application to the 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(e) Reporting.--An entity awarded a grant or contract under 
subsection (a) or (b) shall periodically submit to the Secretary a 
report evaluating the activities supported by the grant or contract.
    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section 
and section 5 of the Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider Protection 
Act, there are authorized to be appropriated $35,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2022 through 2024.''.

SEC. 5. REVIEW WITH RESPECT TO HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL MENTAL HEALTH 
              AND RESILIENCY.

    (a) In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, 
shall--
            (1) conduct a review on improving health care professional 
        mental health and the outcomes of programs authorized under 
        this Act; and
            (2) submit a report to the Congress on the results of such 
        review.
    (b) Considerations.--The review under subsection (a) shall take 
into account--
            (1) the prevalence and severity of mental health conditions 
        among health professionals, and factors that contribute to 
        those mental health conditions;
            (2) barriers to seeking and accessing mental health care 
        for health care professionals, which may include consideration 
        of stigma and licensing concerns, and actions taken by State 
        licensing boards, schools for health professionals, health care 
        professional training associations, hospital associations, or 
        other organizations, as appropriate, to address such barriers;
            (3) the impact of the COVID-19 public health emergency on 
        the mental health of health care professionals and lessons 
        learned for future public health emergencies;
            (4) factors that promote mental health and resiliency among 
        health care professionals, including programs or strategies to 
        strengthen mental health and resiliency among health care 
        professionals; and
            (5) the efficacy of health professional training programs 
        that promote resiliency and improve mental health.
    (c) Recommendations.--The review under subsection (a), as 
appropriate, shall identify best practices related to, and make 
recommendations to address--
            (1) improving mental health and resiliency among health 
        care professionals;
            (2) removing barriers to mental health care for health care 
        professionals; and
            (3) strategies to promote resiliency among health care 
        professionals in health care settings.

SEC. 6. GAO REPORT.

    Not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Congress a 
report on the extent to which Federal substance use disorder and mental 
health grant programs address the prevalence and severity of mental 
health conditions and substance use disorders among health 
professionals. Such report shall--
            (1) include an analysis of available evidence and data 
        related to such conditions and programs; and
            (2) assess whether there are duplicative goals and 
        objectives among such grant programs.
                                                 Union Calendar No. 154

117th CONGRESS

  1st Session

                               H. R. 1667

                          [Report No. 117-213]

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL

     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.

_______________________________________________________________________

                            December 8, 2021

  Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
       House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed
[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1675 Reported in Senate (RS)]

<DOC>





                                                        Calendar No. 71
117th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                S. 1675

                      To improve maternal health.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                              May 18, 2021

   Mr. Warnock (for himself, Mr. Rubio, Ms. Smith, Mr. Marshall, Ms. 
Hassan, Mr. Cassidy, and Ms. Murkowski) introduced the following bill; 
     which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, 
                     Education, Labor, and Pensions

                              June 8, 2021

               Reported by Mrs. Murray, with an amendment
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
                               in italic]

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
                      To improve maternal health.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

<DELETED>SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    This Act may be cited as the ``Maternal Health Quality 
Improvement Act''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 2. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330N of such Act, the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 330O. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
experts representing a variety of clinical specialties, State, tribal, 
or local public health officials, researchers, epidemiologists, 
statisticians, and community organizations, shall establish or continue 
a program to award competitive grants to eligible entities for the 
purpose of--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) identifying, developing, or disseminating 
        best practices to improve maternal health care quality, improve 
        maternal and infant health outcomes, eliminate preventable 
        maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity, and improve 
        infant health outcomes, which may include--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) information on evidence-based 
                practices to improve the quality and safety of maternal 
                health care in hospitals and other health care settings 
                of a State or health care system by addressing topics 
                commonly associated with health complications or risks 
                related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and 
                postpartum care;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) best practices for improving 
                maternal health care based on data findings and reviews 
                conducted by a State maternal mortality review 
                committee that address topics of relevance to common 
                complications or health risks related to prenatal care, 
                labor care, birthing, and postpartum care; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) information on addressing 
                determinants of health that impact maternal health 
                outcomes for women before, during, and after 
                pregnancy;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) collaborating with State maternal mortality 
        review committees to identify issues for the development and 
        implementation of evidence-based practices to improve maternal 
        health outcomes and reduce preventable maternal mortality and 
        severe maternal morbidity, consistent with section 
        317K;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) providing technical assistance and 
        supporting the implementation of best practices identified in 
        paragraph (1) to entities providing health care services to 
        pregnant and postpartum women; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) identifying, developing, and evaluating new 
        models of care that improve maternal and infant health 
        outcomes, which may include the integration of community-based 
        services and clinical care.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) demonstrate in such application that the 
        entity is capable of carrying out data-driven maternal safety 
        and quality improvement initiatives in the areas of obstetrics 
        and gynecology or maternal health.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Report.--Not later than September 30, 2024, and 
every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
Congress on the practices described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
subsection (a). Such report shall include a description of the extent 
to which such practices reduced preventable maternal mortality and 
severe maternal morbidity, and whether such practices improved maternal 
and infant health. The Secretary shall disseminate information on such 
practices, as appropriate.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated $9,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2022 through 2026.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 3. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by 
striking section 763 (42 U.S.C. 294p) and inserting the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 763. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a 
program to award grants to accredited schools of allopathic medicine, 
osteopathic medicine, and nursing, and other health professional 
training programs for the training of health care professionals to 
improve the provision of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and 
postpartum care for racial and ethnic minority populations, including 
with respect to perceptions and biases that may affect the approach to, 
and provision of, care.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to 
the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Reporting Requirements.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Periodic grantee reports.--Each entity 
        awarded a grant under this section shall periodically submit to 
        the Secretary a report on the status of activities conducted 
        using the grant, including a description of the impact of such 
        training on patient outcomes, as applicable.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than 
        September 30, 2024, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
        Congress on the activities conducted using grants under 
        subsection (a) and any best practices identified and 
        disseminated under subsection (d).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and 
disseminate best practices for the training described in subsection 
(a).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2022 through 2026.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 4. STUDY ON IMPROVING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE 
              PROVIDERS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Not later than 2 years after date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, through a 
contract with an independent research organization, conduct a study and 
make recommendations for accredited schools of allopathic medicine, 
osteopathic medicine, and nursing, and other health professional 
training programs on best practices related to training to improve the 
provision of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care 
for racial and ethnic minority populations, including with respect to 
perceptions and biases that may affect the approach to, and provision 
of, care.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 5. PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Section 317K(a)(2) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(E)(i) The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
        in coordination with other offices and agencies, as 
        appropriate, shall establish or continue a competitive grant 
        program for the establishment or support of perinatal quality 
        collaboratives to improve perinatal care and perinatal health 
        outcomes for pregnant and postpartum women and their infants. A 
        State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization may use funds 
        received through such grant to--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(I) support the use of evidence-based or 
                evidence-informed practices to improve outcomes for 
                maternal and infant health;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(II) work with clinical teams; experts; 
                State, local, and, as appropriate, tribal public health 
                officials; and stakeholders, including patients and 
                families, to identify, develop, or disseminate best 
                practices to improve perinatal care and outcomes; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(III) employ strategies that provide 
                opportunities for health care professionals and 
                clinical teams to collaborate across health care 
                settings and disciplines, including primary care and 
                mental health, as appropriate, to improve maternal and 
                infant health outcomes, which may include the use of 
                data to provide timely feedback across hospital and 
                clinical teams to inform responses, and to provide 
                support and training to hospital and clinical teams for 
                quality improvement, as appropriate.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(ii) To be eligible for a grant under clause 
        (i), an entity shall submit to the Secretary an application in 
        such form and manner and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than September 30, 
2025, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to 
Congress a report regarding the activities conducted by recipients of 
grants under subsection (a)(2)(E) of section 317K of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12).</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 6. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM 
              WOMEN.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Grants.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330O of 
such Act, as added by section 2, the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 330P. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM 
              WOMEN.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants for the 
purpose of establishing or operating evidence-based or innovative, 
evidence-informed programs to deliver integrated health care services 
to pregnant and postpartum women to optimize the health of women and 
their infants, including to reduce adverse maternal health outcomes, 
pregnancy-related deaths, and related health disparities (including 
such disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
populations), and, as appropriate, by addressing issues researched 
under subsection (b)(2) of section 317K.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Integrated Services for Pregnant and Postpartum 
Women.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a 
        grant under subsection (a), a State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal 
        organization (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the 
        Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act) shall 
        work with relevant stakeholders that coordinate care to develop 
        and carry out the program, including--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) State, Tribal, and local agencies 
                responsible for Medicaid, public health, social 
                services, mental health, and substance use disorder 
                treatment and services;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) health care providers who serve 
                pregnant and postpartum women; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) community-based health organizations 
                and health workers, including providers of home 
                visiting services and individuals representing 
                communities with disproportionately high rates of 
                maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity, and 
                including those representing racial and ethnic minority 
                populations.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Terms.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Period.--A grant awarded under 
                subsection (a) shall be made for a period of 5 years. 
                Any supplemental award made to a grantee under 
                subsection (a) may be made for a period of less than 5 
                years.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Preference.--In awarding grants 
                under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) give preference to States, 
                        Indian Tribes, and Tribal organizations that 
                        have the highest rates of maternal mortality 
                        and severe maternal morbidity relative to other 
                        such States, Indian Tribes, or Tribal 
                        organizations, respectively; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) shall consider health 
                        disparities related to maternal mortality and 
                        severe maternal morbidity, including such 
                        disparities associated with racial and ethnic 
                        minority populations.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall 
                require grantees to evaluate the outcomes of the 
                programs supported under the grant.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2022 through 2026.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Report on Grant Outcomes and Dissemination of Best 
Practices.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2026, the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to the 
        Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
        Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives a report that describes--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) the outcomes of the activities 
                supported by the grants awarded under the amendments 
                made by this section on maternal and child 
                health;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) best practices and models of care used 
                by recipients of grants under such amendments; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) obstacles identified by recipients of 
                grants under such amendments, and strategies used by 
                such recipients to deliver care, improve maternal and 
                child health, and reduce health disparities.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) Dissemination of best practices.--Not later 
        than August 1, 2026, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        shall disseminate information on best practices and models of 
        care used by recipients of grants under the amendments made by 
        this section (including best practices and models of care 
        relating to the reduction of health disparities, including such 
        disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
        populations, in rates of maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity) to relevant stakeholders, which may include health 
        providers, medical schools, nursing schools, relevant State, 
        tribal, and local agencies, and the general public.</DELETED>

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Maternal Health Quality Improvement 
Act''.

SEC. 2. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended by inserting after section 330N of such Act, the following:

``SEC. 330O. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with experts 
representing a variety of clinical specialties, State, Tribal, or local 
public health officials, researchers, epidemiologists, statisticians, 
and community organizations, shall establish or continue a program to 
award competitive grants to eligible entities for the purpose of--
            ``(1) identifying, developing, or disseminating best 
        practices to improve maternal health care quality and outcomes, 
        improve maternal and infant health, and eliminate preventable 
        maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity, which may 
        include--
                    ``(A) information on evidence-based practices to 
                improve the quality and safety of maternal health care 
                in hospitals and other health care settings of a State 
                or health care system by addressing topics commonly 
                associated with health complications or risks related 
                to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum 
                care;
                    ``(B) best practices for improving maternal health 
                care based on data findings and reviews conducted by a 
                State maternal mortality review committee that address 
                topics of relevance to common complications or health 
                risks related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, 
                and postpartum care; and
                    ``(C) information on addressing determinants of 
                health that impact maternal health outcomes for women 
                before, during, and after pregnancy;
            ``(2) collaborating with State maternal mortality review 
        committees to identify issues for the development and 
        implementation of evidence-based practices to improve maternal 
        health outcomes and reduce preventable maternal mortality and 
        severe maternal morbidity, consistent with section 317K;
            ``(3) providing technical assistance and supporting the 
        implementation of best practices identified in paragraph (1) to 
        entities providing health care services to pregnant and 
        postpartum women; and
            ``(4) identifying, developing, and evaluating new models of 
        care that improve maternal and infant health outcomes, which 
        may include the integration of community-based services and 
        clinical care.
    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
        in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require; and
            ``(2) demonstrate in such application that the entity is 
        capable of carrying out data-driven maternal safety and quality 
        improvement initiatives in the areas of obstetrics and 
        gynecology or maternal health.
    ``(c) Report.--Not later than September 30, 2024, and every 2 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the 
practices described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a). Such 
report shall include a description of the extent to which such 
practices reduced preventable maternal mortality and severe maternal 
morbidity, and whether such practices improved maternal and infant 
health. The Secretary shall disseminate information on such practices, 
as appropriate.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $9,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.

SEC. 3. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by striking 
section 763 (42 U.S.C. 294p) and inserting the following:

``SEC. 763. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
award grants to accredited schools of allopathic medicine, osteopathic 
medicine, and nursing, and other health professional training programs 
for the training of health care professionals to improve the provision 
of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care for racial 
and ethnic minority populations, including with respect to perceptions 
and biases that may affect the approach to, and provision of, care.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection 
(a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Reporting Requirements.--
            ``(1) Periodic grantee reports.--Each entity awarded a 
        grant under this section shall periodically submit to the 
        Secretary a report on the status of activities conducted using 
        the grant, including a description of the impact of such 
        training on patient outcomes, as applicable.
            ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than September 30, 
        2025, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the 
        activities conducted using grants under subsection (a) and any 
        best practices identified and disseminated under subsection 
        (d).
    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and disseminate 
best practices for the training described in subsection (a).
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.

SEC. 4. STUDY ON IMPROVING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    Not later than 2 years after date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, through a contract with 
an independent research organization, conduct a study and make 
recommendations for accredited schools of allopathic medicine, 
osteopathic medicine, and nursing, and other health professional 
training programs on best practices related to training to improve the 
provision of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care 
for racial and ethnic minority populations, including with respect to 
perceptions and biases that may affect the approach to, and provision 
of, care.

SEC. 5. PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVES.

    (a) In General.--Section 317K(a)(2) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
            ``(E)(i) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in coordination 
        with other offices and agencies, as appropriate, shall 
        establish or continue a competitive grant program for the 
        establishment or support of perinatal quality collaboratives to 
        improve perinatal care and perinatal health outcomes for 
        pregnant and postpartum women and their infants. A State, 
        Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization may use funds received 
        through such grant to--
                    ``(I) support the use of evidence-based or 
                evidence-informed practices to improve outcomes for 
                maternal and infant health;
                    ``(II) work with clinical teams; experts; State, 
                local, and, as appropriate, Tribal public health 
                officials; and stakeholders, including patients and 
                families, to identify, develop, or disseminate best 
                practices to improve perinatal care and outcomes; and
                    ``(III) employ strategies that provide 
                opportunities for health care professionals and 
                clinical teams to collaborate across health care 
                settings and disciplines, including primary care and 
                mental health, as appropriate, to improve maternal and 
                infant health outcomes, which may include the use of 
                data to provide timely feedback across hospital and 
                clinical teams to inform responses, and to provide 
                support and training to hospital and clinical teams for 
                quality improvement, as appropriate.
            ``(ii) To be eligible for a grant under clause (i), an 
        entity shall submit to the Secretary an application in such 
        form and manner and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require.''.
    (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than September 30, 2025, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress a 
report regarding the activities conducted by recipients of grants under 
subsection (a)(2)(E) of section 317K of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 247b-12).

SEC. 6. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    (a) Grants.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
241 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330O of such Act, as 
added by section 2, the following:

``SEC. 330P. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants for the purpose 
of establishing or operating evidence-based or innovative, evidence-
informed programs to deliver integrated health care services to 
pregnant and postpartum women to optimize the health of women and their 
infants, including to reduce adverse maternal health outcomes, 
pregnancy-related deaths, and related health disparities (including 
such disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
populations), and, as appropriate, by addressing issues researched 
under subsection (b)(2) of section 317K.
    ``(b) Integrated Services for Pregnant and Postpartum Women.--
            ``(1) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
        subsection (a), a State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization 
        (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-
        Determination and Education Assistance Act) shall work with 
        relevant stakeholders that coordinate care to develop and carry 
        out the program, including--
                    ``(A) State, Tribal, and local agencies responsible 
                for Medicaid, public health, social services, mental 
                health, and substance use disorder treatment and 
                services;
                    ``(B) health care providers who serve pregnant and 
                postpartum women; and
                    ``(C) community-based health organizations and 
                health workers, including providers of home visiting 
                services and individuals representing communities with 
                disproportionately high rates of maternal mortality and 
                severe maternal morbidity, and including those 
                representing racial and ethnic minority populations.
            ``(2) Terms.--
                    ``(A) Period.--A grant awarded under subsection (a) 
                shall be made for a period of 5 years. Any supplemental 
                award made to a grantee under subsection (a) may be 
                made for a period of less than 5 years.
                    ``(B) Priorities.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
                            ``(i) give priority to States, Indian 
                        Tribes, and Tribal organizations that have the 
                        highest rates of maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity relative to other such 
                        States, Indian Tribes, or Tribal organizations, 
                        respectively; and
                            ``(ii) shall consider health disparities 
                        related to maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity, including such disparities 
                        associated with racial and ethnic minority 
                        populations.
                    ``(C) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall require 
                grantees to evaluate the outcomes of the programs 
                supported under the grant.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.
    (b) Report on Grant Outcomes and Dissemination of Best Practices.--
            (1) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2026, the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Committee on 
        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
        Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives a report that describes--
                    (A) the outcomes of the activities supported by the 
                grants awarded under the amendments made by this 
                section on maternal and child health;
                    (B) best practices and models of care used by 
                recipients of grants under such amendments; and
                    (C) obstacles identified by recipients of grants 
                under such amendments, and strategies used by such 
                recipients to deliver care, improve maternal and child 
                health, and reduce health disparities.
            (2) Dissemination of best practices.--Not later than August 
        1, 2026, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
        disseminate information on best practices and models of care 
        used by recipients of grants under the amendments made by this 
        section (including best practices and models of care relating 
        to the reduction of health disparities, including such 
        disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
        populations, in rates of maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity) to relevant stakeholders, which may include health 
        providers, medical schools, nursing schools, relevant State, 
        Tribal, and local agencies, and the general public.

SEC. 7. MATERNAL VACCINATION AWARENESS.

    In carrying out the public awareness initiative related to 
vaccinations pursuant to section 313 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 245), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take 
into consideration the importance of increasing awareness and knowledge 
of the safety and effectiveness of vaccines to prevent disease in 
pregnant and postpartum women and in infants and the need to improve 
vaccination rates in communities and populations with low rates of 
vaccination.
                                                        Calendar No. 71

117th CONGRESS

  1st Session

                                S. 1675

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL

                      To improve maternal health.

_______________________________________________________________________

                              June 8, 2021

                       Reported with an amendment

[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2357 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

103d CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 2357

To achieve universal health insurance coverage, and for other purposes.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

               August 3 (legislative day, July 20), 1994

Mr. Mitchell introduced the following bill; which was read the first time

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
To achieve universal health insurance coverage, and for other purposes.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Security 
Act''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.

  TITLE I--IMPROVED ACCESS TO STANDARDIZED AND AFFORDABLE HEALTH PLANS

       Subtitle A--Rules and Definitions of General Applicability

                 Part 1--Rules of General Applicability

Sec. 1001. Access to standardized coverage.
Sec. 1002. Standard health plan principles.
Sec. 1003. Protection of consumer choice.
                          Part 2--Definitions

Sec. 1011. Definitions relating to health plans.
Sec. 1012. Definitions relating to employment and income.
Sec. 1013. Other general definitions.

                   Subtitle B--Health Plan Standards

           Part 1--Establishment and Application of Standards

Sec. 1101. Establishment of National standards.
Sec. 1102. General rules.

                    Part 2--Insurance Market Reform

Sec. 1111. Guaranteed issue, availability, and renewability.
Sec. 1112. Enrollment.
Sec. 1113. Coverage of dependents.
Sec. 1114. Nondiscrimination based on health status.
Sec. 1115. Benefits.
Sec. 1116. Community rating requirements.
Sec. 1117. Risk adjustment and reinsurance.
Sec. 1118. Financial solvency requirements and consumer protection 
                            against provider claims.

                     Part 3--Delivery System Reform

Sec. 1121. Prohibition of discrimination.
Sec. 1122. Quality assurance standards.
Sec. 1123. Consumer grievance process.
Sec. 1124. Health security cards.
Sec. 1125. Information and marketing standards.
Sec. 1126. Information regarding a patient's right to self-
                            determination in health care services.
Sec. 1127. Contracts with purchasing cooperatives.
Sec. 1128. Health plan arrangements with providers.
Sec. 1129. Utilization management protocols and physician incentive 
                            plans.

               Part 4--Supplemental Health Benefits Plans

Sec. 1141. Supplemental health benefits plans.

                 Subtitle C--Benefits and Cost-Sharing

                   Part 1--Standard Benefits Packages

Sec. 1201. General description of standard benefits packages.
Sec. 1202. Description of categories of items and services.
Sec. 1203. Definitions.

                 Part 2--National Health Benefits Board

Sec. 1211. Creation of National health benefits board; membership.
Sec. 1212. Qualifications of board members.
Sec. 1213. General duties and responsibilities.
Sec. 1214. Powers.
Sec. 1215. Funding.
Sec. 1216. Applicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.
Sec. 1217. Congressional consideration of Board proposals.

                   Subtitle D--Access to Health Plans

                    Part 1--Access Through Employers

Sec. 1301. General employer responsibilities.
Sec. 1302. Auditing of records.
Sec. 1303. Prohibition of certain employer discrimination.
Sec. 1304. Prohibition on self-insuring cost-sharing benefits.
Sec. 1305. Responsibilities in single-payer States.
Sec. 1306. Development of large employer purchasing groups.
Sec. 1307. Rules governing litigation involving retiree health 
                            benefits.
Sec. 1308. Enforcement.

    Part 2--Access Through Health Insurance Purchasing Cooperatives

                    SUBPART A--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Sec. 1321. Organization and operation.
Sec. 1322. Membership.
Sec. 1323. Agreements with standard health plans.
Sec. 1324. Membership and marketing fees.

                  SUBPART B--COMMUNITY-RATED EMPLOYERS

Sec. 1331. Duties of purchasing cooperatives.

          SUBPART C--FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM

Sec. 1341. Requirements applicable to FEHBP.
Sec. 1342. Special rules for FEHBP supplemental plans.
Sec. 1343. Definitions.

                 Part 3--Treatment of Association Plans

Sec. 1351. Rules relating to multiple employer welfare arrangements.
Sec. 1352. Association plans.

                  Subtitle E--Federal Responsibilities

             Part 1--Secretary of Health and Human Services

                       SUBPART A--GENERAL DUTIES

Sec. 1401. General duties and responsibilities.
Sec. 1402. Annual report.
Sec. 1403. Assistance with family collections.
Sec. 1404. Advisory opinions.
Sec. 1405. Funding.

 SUBPART B--RESPONSIBILITIES RELATING TO REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF STATE 
                                SYSTEMS

Sec. 1411. Federal review and action on State systems.
Sec. 1412. Failure of participating States to meet conditions for 
                            compliance.
Sec. 1413. Reduction in payments for health programs by Secretary of 
                            Health and Human Services.
Sec. 1414. Review of Federal determinations.
Sec. 1415. Federal support for State implementation.

        SUBPART C--RESPONSIBILITIES IN ABSENCE OF STATE SYSTEMS

Sec. 1421. Application of subpart.
Sec. 1422. Federal assumption of responsibilities in non-participating 
                            States.
Sec. 1423. Imposition of surcharge on premiums under federally-operated 
                            system.
Sec. 1424. Return to State operation.

    SUBPART D--ESTABLISHMENT OF CLASS FACTORS FOR CHARGING PREMIUMS

Sec. 1431. Premium class and age class factors.

 SUBPART E--RISK ADJUSTMENT AND REINSURANCE METHODOLOGY FOR PAYMENT OF 
                                 PLANS

Sec. 1435. Development of a risk adjustment and reinsurance 
                            methodology.

         SUBPART F--RESPONSIBILITIES FOR FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS

Sec. 1441. Capital standards for community-rated plans.
Sec. 1442. Standard for guaranty funds.

                       SUBPART G--OPEN ENROLLMENT

Sec. 1445. Periods of authorized changes in enrollment.
Sec. 1446. Distribution of comparative information.
Sec. 1455. Reports.

                 Part 2--Essential Community Providers

Sec. 1461. Certification.
Sec. 1462. Categories of providers automatically certified.
Sec. 1463. Standards for additional providers.
Sec. 1464. Certification process; review; termination of 
                            certifications.
Sec. 1465. Notification of participating States.
Sec. 1466. Health plan requirement.
Sec. 1467. Recommendation on continuation of requirement.
Sec. 1468. Definitions.

        Part 3--Specific Responsibilities of Secretary of Labor

Sec. 1481. Responsibilities of Secretary of Labor.
Sec. 1482. Federal role with respect to multi-State self-insured health 
                            plans.
Sec. 1483. Assistance with employer collections.
Sec. 1484. Penalties for failure of large employer purchasing groups to 
                            meet requirements.
Sec. 1485. Applicability of ERISA enforcement mechanisms for 
                            enforcement of certain requirements.
Sec. 1486. Workplace wellness program.

                 Part 4--Office of Rural Health Policy

Sec. 1491. Office of rural health policy.

            Subtitle F--Participating State Responsibilities

                    Part 1--General Responsibilities

Sec. 1501. State plan and certification of standard health plans and 
                            supplemental health benefits plans.
Sec. 1502. Community rating areas and health plan service areas.
Sec. 1503. Open enrollment periods.
Sec. 1504. Risk adjustment program.
Sec. 1505. Guaranty funds.
Sec. 1506. Enrollment activities.
Sec. 1507. Rural and medically underserved areas.
Sec. 1508. Public access sites.
Sec. 1509. Requirements relating to possessions of the United States.
Sec. 1510. Right of recovery of certain taxes against providers.

                    Part 2--Treatment of State Laws

Sec. 1511. Preemption of certain State laws relating to health plans.
Sec. 1512. Override of restrictive State practice laws.

                       Part 3--State Flexibility

                     SUBPART A--EXISTING STATE LAWS

Sec. 1521. Continuance of existing Federal law waivers.
Sec. 1522. Hawaii prepaid Health Care Act.
Sec. 1523. Alternative State provider payment systems.
Sec. 1524. Alternative State hospital services payment systems.

         SUBPART B--REQUIREMENTS FOR STATE SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEMS

Sec. 1531. Single-payer system described.
Sec. 1532. General requirements for single-payer systems.
Sec. 1533. Special rules for States operating statewide single-payer 
                            system.
Sec. 1534. Special rules for community rating area-specific single-
                            payer systems.

    SUBPART C--EARLY IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPREHENSIVE STATE PROGRAMS

Sec. 1541. Early implementation of comprehensive State programs.

                  Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 1601. Provision of items or services contrary to religious belief 
                            or moral conviction.
Sec. 1602. Antidiscrimination.

                         TITLE II--NEW BENEFITS

   Subtitle A--Coverage of Outpatient Prescription Drugs in Medicare

Sec. 2000. References in subtitle.
           Part 1--Coverage of Outpatient Prescription Drugs

Sec. 2001. Coverage of outpatient prescription drugs.
Sec. 2002. Payment rules and related requirements for covered 
                            outpatient drugs.
Sec. 2003. Medicare rebates for covered outpatient drugs.
Sec. 2004. Prescription drug payment review commission.
Sec. 2005. Coverage of home infusion drug therapy services.
Sec. 2006. Medicare drug benefit plans.
Sec. 2007. Payment for covered outpatient drug benefit under medicare 
                            contracts with HMOs and CMPS.
Sec. 2008. Maintenance of effort.
             Subtitle B--Home and Community-Based Services

    Part 1--Home and Community-based Services for Individuals With 
                              Disabilities

Sec. 2101. State programs for home and community-based services for 
                            individuals with disabilities.
Sec. 2102. State plans.
Sec. 2103. Individuals with disabilities defined.
Sec. 2104. Home and community-based services covered under State plan.
Sec. 2105. Cost sharing.
Sec. 2106. Quality assurance and safeguards.
Sec. 2107. Advisory groups.
Sec. 2108. Payments to States.
Sec. 2109. Appropriations; allotments to States.
Sec. 2110. Federal evaluations.
Part 2--Grants Relating to the Development of Hospital Linkage Programs

Sec. 2111. Information and technical assistance grants relating to 
                            development of hospital linkage programs.
  Subtitle C--Long-Term Care Insurance Improvement and Accountability

Sec. 2200. Short title.
          Part 1--Promulgation of Standards and Model Benefits

Sec. 2201. Standards.
 Part 2--Establishment and Implementation of Long-term Care Insurance 
                            Policy Standards

Sec. 2211. Implementation of policy standards.
Sec. 2212. Regulation of sales practices.
Sec. 2213. Additional responsibilities for carriers.
Sec. 2214. Renewability standards for issuance, and basic for 
                            cancellation of policies.
Sec. 2215. Benefit standards.
Sec. 2216. Nonforfeiture.
Sec. 2217. Limit of period of contestability and right to return.
Sec. 2218. Civil money penalty.
 Part 3--Long-term Care Insurance Policies, Definition and Endorsements

Sec. 2221. Long-term care insurance policy defined.
Sec. 2222. Code of conduct with respect to endorsements.
                         Subtitle D--Life Care

Sec. 2301. Short title.
Sec. 2302. Life care: public insurance program for nursing home care.
                      Subtitle E--Study and Report

Sec. 2401. Study of issues related to end of life care.
                TITLE III--HEALTH PROFESSIONS WORKFORCE

        Subtitle A--Workforce Priorities Under Federal Payments

Sec. 3000. Definitions.
 Part 1--Institutional Costs of Graduate Medical Education; Workforce 
                               Priorities

       SUBPART A--NATIONAL COUNCIL REGARDING WORKFORCE PRIORITIES

Sec. 3001. National Council on Graduate Medical Education.
         SUBPART B--AUTHORIZED POSITIONS IN SPECIALTY TRAINING

Sec. 3011. Cooperation regarding approved physician training programs.
Sec. 3012. Annual authorization of total number of graduate medical 
                            education positions.
Sec. 3013. Annual authorization of number of specialty positions; 
                            requirements regarding primary health care.
Sec. 3014. National Council recommendation of number of graduate 
                            medical education positions.
Sec. 3015. Allocations among specialities and programs.
             SUBPART C--COSTS OF GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION

      Chapter 1--Operation Of Approved Physician Training Programs

Sec. 3031. Federal formula payments to qualified entities for the costs 
                            of the operation of approved physician 
                            training programs.
Sec. 3032. Application for payments.
Sec. 3033. Availability of funds for payments; annual amount of 
                            payments.
Sec. 3034. Payments for dental and podiatric positions.
   Chapter 2--Academic Health Centers and Other Eligible Institutions

Sec. 3051. Federal formula payments to academic health centers and 
                            other eligible institutions.
Sec. 3052. Request for payments.
Sec. 3053. Availability of funds for payments; annual amount of 
                            payments.
                   SUBPART D--TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 3055. Transitional payments to institutions.
Sec. 3056. Waiver of foreign country residence requirement with respect 
                            to international medical graduates.
              Part 2--Health Professions Schools Payments

                 SUBPART A--PAYMENTS TO MEDICAL SCHOOLS

Sec. 3061. Federal payments to medical schools.
Sec. 3062. Application for payments.
Sec. 3063. Authorization of appropriations; annual amount of payments.
                SUBPART B--PAYMENTS TO NURSING PROGRAMS

Sec. 3071. Federal payments to graduate nurse training programs.
Sec. 3072. National Council on Graduate Nurse Training.
                 SUBPART C--PAYMENTS TO DENTAL SCHOOLS

Sec. 3073. Dental schools.
            SUBPART D--PAYMENTS TO SCHOOLS OF PUBLIC HEALTH

Sec. 3074. Schools of public health.
                        Part 3--Related Programs

                    SUBPART A--WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

Sec. 3081. Programs of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Sec. 3082. Programs of the Secretary of Labor.
Sec. 3083. Requirement for certain programs regarding redeployment of 
                            health care workers.
       SUBPART B--TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR WORKFORCE STABILITY

Sec. 3091. Application.
Sec. 3092. Definitions.
Sec. 3093. Obligations of displacing employer and affiliated 
                            enterprises in event of displacement.
Sec. 3094. Employment with successors.
Sec. 3095. Collective bargaining obligations during transition period.
Sec. 3096. General provisions.
                  Subtitle B--Academic Health Centers

Sec. 3131. Discretionary grants regarding access to centers.
                Subtitle C--Health Research Initiatives

                 Part 1--Programs for Certain Agencies

Sec. 3201. Biomedical, behavioral and health services research.
Sec. 3202. Health services research.
Sec. 3203. AHCPR guidelines and standards.
                      Part 2--Funding for Program

Sec. 3211. Authorizations of appropriations.
                Part 3--Medical Technology Impact Study

Sec. 3221. Medical technology impact study.
    Subtitle D--Core Functions of Public Health Programs; National 
                Initiatives Regarding Preventive Health

                            Part 1--Funding

Sec. 3301. Authorizations of appropriations.
            Part 2--Core Functions of Public Health Programs

Sec. 3311. Purposes.
Sec. 3312. Grants to States for core functions of public health.
Sec. 3313. Submission of information.
Sec. 3314. Reports.
Sec. 3315. Application for grant.
Sec. 3316. Allocations for certain activities.
Sec. 3317. Definitions.
Sec. 3318. Single application and uniform reporting systems for core 
                            functions of public health and public 
                            health categorical grant programs 
                            administered by the centers for disease 
                            control and prevention.
  Part 3--National Initiatives Regarding Health Promotion and Disease 
                               Prevention

                       SUBPART A--GENERAL GRANTS

Sec. 3331. Grants for national prevention initiatives.
Sec. 3332. Priorities.
Sec. 3333. Submission of information.
Sec. 3334. Application for grant.
   SUBPART B--DEVELOPMENT OF TELEMEDICINE IN RURAL UNDERSERVED AREAS

Sec. 3341. Grants for development of rural telemedicine.
Sec. 3342. Report and evaluation of telemedicine.
Sec. 3343. Regulations on reimbursement of telemedicine.
Sec. 3344. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 3345. Definitions.
   Subtitle E--Health Services for Medically Underserved Populations

             Part 1--Initiatives for Access to Health Care

               SUBPART A--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS

Sec. 3411. Authorizations of appropriations.
SUBPART B--DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH GROUPS AND HEALTH CARE SITES 
                              AND SERVICES

Sec. 3421. Grants and contracts for development of plans and networks 
                            and the expansion and development of health 
                            care sites and services.
Sec. 3422. Certain uses of awards.
Sec. 3423. Application.
Sec. 3424. Purposes and conditions.
 SUBPART C--CAPITAL COST OF DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH GROUPS AND 
                             OTHER PURPOSES

Sec. 3441. Direct loans and grants.
Sec. 3442. Certain requirements.
Sec. 3443. Defaults; right of recovery.
Sec. 3444. Provisions regarding construction or expansion of 
                            facilities.
Sec. 3445. Application for assistance.
Sec. 3446. Administration of programs.
             SUBPART D--ENABLING AND SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES

Sec. 3461. Grants and contracts for enabling and supplemental services.
Sec. 3462. Authorizations of appropriations.
                 Part 2--National Health Service Corps

Sec. 3471. Authorizations of appropriations.
Sec. 3472. Allocation for participation of nurses in scholarship and 
                            loan repayment programs.
Sec. 3473. Allocation for participation of psychiatrists, 
                            psychologists, and clinical social workers 
                            in scholarship and loan repayment programs.
      Part 3--Payments to Hospitals Serving Vulnerable Populations

Sec. 3481. Payments to hospitals.
Sec. 3482. Identification of eligible hospitals.
Sec. 3483. Amount of payments.
Sec. 3484. Base year.
               Subtitle F--Mental Health; Substance Abuse

           Part 1--Authorities Regarding Participating States

Sec. 3510. Integration of mental health and substance abuse systems.
Sec. 3511. Report on integration of mental health systems.
Part 2--Assistance for State Managed Mental Health and Substance Abuse 
                                Programs

Sec. 3531. Availability of assistance.
Sec. 3532. Plan requirements.
Sec. 3533. Additional Federal responsibilities.
Sec. 3534. Authorization of appropriations.
   Subtitle G--Comprehensive School Health Education; School-Related 
                            Health Services

   Part 1--Healthy Students-Healthy Schools Grants for School Health 
                               Education

Sec. 3601. Purposes.
Sec. 3602. Healthy students-healthy schools grants.
Sec. 3603. Healthy Students-Healthy Schools Interagency Task Force.
Sec. 3604. Duties of the Secretary.
                 Part 5--School-related Health Services

                  SUBPART A--DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION

Sec. 3681. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 3682. Eligibility for grants.
Sec. 3683. Preferences.
Sec. 3684. Planning and development grants.
Sec. 3685. Grants for operation of school health services.
            SUBPART B--CAPITAL COSTS OF DEVELOPING PROJECTS

Sec. 3691. Funding.
              Subtitle H--Public Health Service Initiative

Sec. 3695. Public health service initiative.
       Subtitle I--Additional Provisions Regarding Public Health

Sec. 3901. Curriculum development and implementation regarding domestic 
                            violence and women's health.
Sec. 3902. Community scholarship programs.
               Subtitle J--Occupational Safety and Health

Sec. 3903. Occupational injury and illness prevention.
                    Subtitle K--Full Funding for WIC

Sec. 3905. Full funding for WIC.
                 Subtitle L--Border Health Improvement

Sec. 3908. Border Health Commission.
                    TITLE IV--MEDICARE AND MEDICAID

Sec. 4000. References in title.
                          Subtitle A--Medicare

             Part 1--Integration of Medicare Beneficiaries

Sec. 4001. Individual election to remain in certain health plans.
Sec. 4002. Enrollment and termination of enrollment.
                 Part 2--Provisions Relating to Part A

Sec. 4101. Inpatient hospital services update for PPS hospitals.
Sec. 4102. Reduction in payments for capital-related costs for 
                            inpatient hospital services.
Sec. 4103. Reductions in disproportionate share payments.
Sec. 4104. Extension of freeze on updates to routine service cost 
                            limits for skilled nursing facilities.
Sec. 4105. Medicare-dependent, small rural hospitals.
Sec. 4106. Provisions relating to rural health transition grant 
                            program.
Sec. 4107. Payments for sole community hospitals with teaching programs 
                            and multihospital campuses.
Sec. 4108. Moratorium on designation of new long-term hospitals.
Sec. 4109. Revised payment methodology for rehabilitation and long-term 
                            care hospitals.
Sec. 4110. Termination of indirect medical education payments.
Sec. 4111. Limited service hospital program.
Sec. 4112. Subacute care study.
                 Part 3--Provisions Relating to Part B

Sec. 4201. Updates for physicians' services.
Sec. 4202. Substitution of real GDP to adjust for volume and intensity; 
                            repeal of restriction on maximum reduction 
                            permitted in default update.
Sec. 4203. Payment for physicians' services relating to inpatient stays 
                            in certain hospitals.
Sec. 4204. Changes in underserved area bonus payments.
Sec. 4205. Correction of MVPS upward bias.
Sec. 4206. Demonstration projects for medicare State-based performance 
                            standard rate of increase.
Sec. 4207. Elimination of formula-driven overpayments for certain 
                            outpatient hospital services.
Sec. 4208. Eye or eye and ear hospitals.
Sec. 4209. Imposition of coinsurance on laboratory services.
Sec. 4210. Application of competitive acquisition process for part B 
                            items and services.
Sec. 4211. Application of competitive acquisition procedures for 
                            laboratory services.
Sec. 4212. Expanded coverage for physician assistants and nurse 
                            practitioners.
Sec. 4213. Elimination of balance billing.
Sec. 4214. Development and implementation of resource-based methodology 
                            for practice expenses.
Sec. 4215. Payments for durable medical equipment.
Sec. 4216. General part B premium.
              Part 4--Provisions Relating to Parts A and B

Sec. 4301. Medicare secondary payer changes.
Sec. 4302. Increase in medicare secondary payer coverage for end stage 
                            renal disease services to 24 months.
Sec. 4303. Expansion of centers of excellence.
Sec. 4304. Reduction in routine cost limits for home health services.
Sec. 4305. Imposition of 20 percent coinsurance on home health services 
                            under medicare.
Sec. 4306. Termination of graduate medical education payments.
Sec. 4307. Medicare select.
                      Subtitle B--Medicaid Program

Part 1--Integration of Certain Medicaid Eligibles Into Reformed Health 
                              Care System

Sec. 4601. Limiting coverage under medicaid of items and services 
                            covered under standard benefit package.
   Part 2--Coordinated Care Services for Disabled Medicaid Eligibles

Sec. 4605. Coordinated care services for disabled medicaid eligibles.
      Part 3--Payments to Hospitals Serving Vulnerable Populations

Sec. 4611. Replacement of DSH payment provisions with provisions 
                            relating to payments to hospitals serving 
                            vulnerable populations.
               Part 4--Medicaid Long-term Care Provisions

Sec. 4615. Increased resource disregard for individuals receiving 
                            certain services.
Sec. 4616. Frail elderly demonstration project waivers.
Sec. 4617. Elimination of requirement of prior institutionalization 
                            with respect to habilitation services 
                            furnished under a waiver for home or 
                            community-based services.
Sec. 4618. Elimination of rule regarding availability of beds in 
                            certain institutions.
Sec. 4619. Preadmission screening for mentally retarded individuals.
                         Part 5--Miscellaneous

Sec. 4621. Medicaid coverage of all certified nurse practitioner and 
                            clinical nurse specialist services.
Sec. 4622. Relief from third party liability requirements when cost-
                            effective.
                TITLE V--QUALITY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

             Subtitle A--Quality Management and Improvement

Sec. 5001. National quality council.
Sec. 5002. National goals and performance measures of quality.
Sec. 5003. Standards and performance measures for health plans.
Sec. 5004. Plan data analysis and consumer surveys.
Sec. 5005. Evaluation and reporting of quality performance.
Sec. 5006. Development and dissemination of practice guidelines.
Sec. 5007. Research on health care quality.
Sec. 5008. Quality improvement foundations.
Sec. 5009. Consumer information and advocacy.
Sec. 5010. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 5011. Role of health plans in quality management.
Sec. 5012. Information on health care providers.
Sec. 5013. Conforming amendments to Public Health Service Act.
               Subtitle B--Administrative Simplification

                    Part 1--Purpose and Definitions

Sec. 5101. Purpose.
Sec. 5102. Definitions.
    Part 2--Standards for Data Elements and Information Transactions

Sec. 5111. General requirements on secretary.
Sec. 5112. Standards for data elements of health information.
Sec. 5113. Information transaction standards.
Sec. 5114. Standards relating to written claims submitted by 
                            individuals and written explanations of 
                            benefits.
Sec. 5115. Timetables for adoption of standards.
     Part 3--Requirements With Respect to Certain Transactions and 
                              Information

Sec. 5121. Requirements with respect to certain transactions and 
                            information.
Sec. 5122. Timetables for compliance with requirements.
                  Part 4--Accessing Health Information

Sec. 5131. Accessing health information for authorized purposes.
Sec. 5132. Responding to access requests.
Sec. 5133. Length of time information should be accessible.
Sec. 5134. Timetables for adoption of standards and compliance.
   Part 5--Standards and Certification for Health Information Network

Sec. 5141. Standards and certification for health information network 
                            services.
Sec. 5142. Ensuring availability of information.
                           Part 6--Penalties

Sec. 5151. General penalty for failure to comply with requirements and 
                            standards.
                    Part 7--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 5161. Imposition of additional requirements.
Sec. 5162. Effect on State law.
Sec. 5164. Health information continuity.
Sec. 5165. Protection of commercial information.
Sec. 5166. Payment for health care services or health plan premiums.
Sec. 5167. Health security cards.
Sec. 5168. Misuse of health security card or personal health 
                            identifier.
Sec. 5169. Direct billing for clinical laboratory services.
Sec. 5170. Authorization of appropriations.
                  Part 8--Assistance to the Secretary

Sec. 5171. General requirement on secretary.
Sec. 5172. Health information advisory committee.
Part 9--Demonstration Projects for Community-based Clinical Information 
                                Systems

Sec. 5181. Grants for demonstration projects.
           Part 10--Medicare and Medicaid Coverage Data Bank

Sec. 5191. Repeal of medicare and medicaid coverage data bank.
               Subtitle C--Privacy of Health Information

                    Part 1--Findings and Definitions

Sec. 5201. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 5202. Definitions.
                     Part 2--Authorized Disclosures

                     SUBPART A--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 5206. General rules regarding disclosure.
Sec. 5207. Authorizations for disclosure of protected health 
                            information.
Sec. 5208. Certified health information network services.
          SUBPART B--SPECIFIC DISCLOSURES RELATING TO PATIENT

Sec. 5211. Disclosures for treatment and financial and administrative 
                            transactions.
Sec. 5212. Next of kin and directory information.
Sec. 5213. Emergency circumstances.
   SUBPART C--DISCLOSURE FOR OVERSIGHT, PUBLIC HEALTH, AND RESEARCH 
                                PURPOSES

Sec. 5216. Oversight.
Sec. 5217. Public health.
Sec. 5218. Health research.
SUBPART D--DISCLOSURE FOR JUDICIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
                                PURPOSES

Sec. 5221. Judicial and administrative purposes.
Sec. 5222. Law enforcement.
    SUBPART E--DISCLOSURE PURSUANT TO GOVERNMENT SUBPOENA OR WARRANT

Sec. 5226. Government subpoenas and warrants.
Sec. 5227. Access procedures for law enforcement subpoenas and 
                            warrants.
Sec. 5228. Challenge procedures for law enforcement warrants and 
                            subpoenas.
        SUBPART F--DISCLOSURE PURSUANT TO PRIVATE PARTY SUBPOENA

Sec. 5231. Private party subpoenas.
Sec. 5232. Access procedures for private party subpoenas.
Sec. 5233. Challenge procedures for private party subpoenas.
     Part 3--Procedures for Ensuring Security of Protected Health 
                              Information

                 SUBPART A--ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFEGUARDS

Sec. 5236. Establishment of safeguards.
Sec. 5237. Accounting for disclosures.
 SUBPART B--REVIEW OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION BY SUBJECTS OF THE 
                              INFORMATION

Sec. 5241. Inspection of protected health information.
Sec. 5242. Amendment of protected health information.
Sec. 5243. Notice of information practices.
            SUBPART C--STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC DISCLOSURES

Sec. 5246. Standards for electronic disclosures.
                           Part 4--Sanctions

            SUBPART A--NO SANCTIONS FOR PERMISSIBLE ACTIONS

Sec. 5251. No liability for permissible disclosures.
Sec. 5252. No liability for institutional review board determinations.
Sec. 5253. Reliance on certified entity.
                       SUBPART B--CIVIL SANCTIONS

Sec. 5256. Civil penalty.
Sec. 5257. Civil action.
                     SUBPART C--CRIMINAL SANCTIONS

Sec. 5261. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information.
                   Part 5--Administrative Provisions

Sec. 5266. Relationship to other laws.
Sec. 5267. Rights of incompetents.
Sec. 5268. Exercise of rights.
  Subtitle D--Expanded Efforts To Combat Health Care Fraud and Abuse 
                   Affecting Federal Outlay Programs

                      Part 1--Improved Enforcement

Sec. 5301. Health care fraud and abuse affecting Federal outlay 
                            programs.
Sec. 5302. Establishment of Federal outlay program fraud and abuse 
                            control account.
Sec. 5303. Use of funds by Inspector General.
Sec. 5304. Rewards for information leading to prosecution and 
                            conviction.
              Part 2--Civil Penalties and Rights of Action

Sec. 5311. Civil monetary penalties.
Sec. 5312. Permitting parties to bring actions on own behalf.
Sec. 5313. Exclusion from program participation.
                   Part 3--Amendments to Criminal Law

Sec. 5321. Health care fraud.
Sec. 5322. Theft or embezzlement.
Sec. 5323. False Statements.
Sec. 5324. Bribery and graft.
Sec. 5325. Injunctive relief relating to health care offenses.
Sec. 5326. Grand jury disclosure.
Sec. 5327. Forfeitures for violations of fraud statutes.
              Part 4--Amendments to Civil False Claims Act

Sec. 5331. Amendments to Civil False claims Act.
                         Part 5--Effective Date

Sec. 5341. Effective date.
                  Subtitle E--Medical Liability Reform

                         Part 1--System Reforms

Sec. 5401. Federal tort reform.
Sec. 5402. State-based alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
Sec. 5403. Requirement of certificate of merit.
Sec. 5404. Limitation on amount of attorney's contingency fees.
Sec. 5405. Periodic payment of awards.
Sec. 5406. Federal study on medical negligence.
Part 2--Demonstration Project Relating to Medical Malpractice Liability

Sec. 5411. Pilot program applying practice guidelines to medical 
                            malpractice liability actions.
Sec. 5412. Enterprise liability demonstration project.
                  Subtitle F--Remedies and Enforcement

   Part 1--Review of Benefit Determinations for Enrolled Individuals

                        SUBPART A--GENERAL RULES

Sec. 5501. Health plan claims procedure.
Sec. 5502. Review in area complaint review offices of grievances based 
                            on acts or practices by health plans.
Sec. 5503. Initial proceedings in complaint review offices.
Sec. 5504. Hearings before hearing officers in complaint review 
                            offices.
Sec. 5505. Civil money penalties.
                  SUBPART B--EARLY RESOLUTION PROGRAMS

Sec. 5511. Establishment of early resolution programs in complaint 
                            review offices.
Sec. 5512. Initiation of participation in mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5513. Mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5514. Legal effect of participation in mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5515. Enforcement of settlement agreements.
Sec. 5516. Due process for health care providers.
         Part 2--Additional Remedies and Enforcement Provisions

Sec. 5531. Judicial review of Federal action on State systems.
Sec. 5532. Civil enforcement.
Sec. 5533. Priority of certain bankruptcy claims.
Sec. 5534. Private right to enforce State responsibilities.
Sec. 5535. Private right to enforce Federal responsibilities in 
                            operating a system in a State.
Sec. 5536. Enforcement of consumer protections.
Sec. 5537. Discrimination claims.
Sec. 5538. Nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs.
Sec. 5539. Civil and administration action by essential community 
                            provider.
Sec. 5540. Facial constitutional challenges.
Sec. 5541. Treatment of plans as parties in civil actions.
Sec. 5542. Whistleblower protections.
Sec. 5543. General nonpreemption of rights and remedies.
                    Subtitle G--Repeal of Exemption

Sec. 5601. Repeal of exemption for health insurance.
              TITLE VI--INDIVIDUAL AND EMPLOYER SUBSIDIES

       Subtitle A--Individual Premium and Cost-Sharing Assistance

Sec. 6001. Requirement to operate State program.
Sec. 6002. Assistance with standard health plan premiums.
Sec. 6003. Assistance with cost-sharing for standard health plans.
Sec. 6004. Eligibility determinations.
Sec. 6005. End-of-year reconciliation for premium assistance.
Sec. 6006. Enrollment outreach.
Sec. 6007. Payments to States.
Sec. 6008. Definitions and determinations of income.
                     Subtitle B--Employer Subsidies

Sec. 6101. Purpose.
Sec. 6102. Eligible employers.
Sec. 6103. Employer certification.
Sec. 6104. Amount of subsidy.
Sec. 6105. Definition.
                     TITLE VII--REVENUE PROVISIONS

Sec. 7000. Amendment of 1986 Code.
                    Subtitle A--Financing Provisions

              Part 1--Increase in Tax on Tobacco Products

Sec. 7101. Increase in excise taxes on tobacco products.
Sec. 7102. Modifications of certain tobacco tax provisions.
Sec. 7103. Imposition of excise tax on manufacture or importation of 
                            roll-your-own tobacco.
                   Part 2--Health Related Assessments

Sec. 7111. Assessments on insured and self-insured health plans.
Sec. 7112. High cost health plan assessment.
           Part 3--Recapture of Certain Health Care Subsidies

Sec. 7121. Recapture of certain health care subsidies received by high-
                            income individuals.
                        Part 4--Other Provisions

Sec. 7131. Increase in tax on certain hollow point and large caliber 
                            handgun ammunition.
Sec. 7132. Modification to self-employment tax treatment of certain S 
                            corporation shareholders and partners.
Sec. 7133. Extending medicare coverage of, and application of hospital 
                            insurance tax to, all State and local 
                            government employees.
       Subtitle B--Tax Treatment of Employer-Provided Health Care

                       Part 1--General Provisions

Sec. 7201. Limitation on exclusion for employer-provided health 
                            benefits.
Sec. 7202. Health benefits may not be provided under cafeteria plans.
Sec. 7203. Increase in deduction for health insurance costs of self-
                            employed individuals.
Sec. 7204. Limitation on prepayment of medical insurance premiums.
          Part 2--Voluntary Employer Health Care Contributions

Sec. 7111. Tax treatment of voluntary employer health care 
                            contributions.
              Subtitle C--Exempt Health Care Organizations

                       Part 1--General Provisions

Sec. 7301. Qualification and disclosure requirements for nonprofit 
                            health care organizations.
Sec. 7302. Excise taxes for private inurement by tax-exempt health care 
                            organizations.
Sec. 7303. Treatment of health maintenance organizations, parent 
                            organizations, and health insurance 
                            purchasing cooperatives.
Sec. 7304. Tax treatment of taxable organizations providing health 
                            insurance and other prepaid health care 
                            services.
Sec. 7305. Repeal of section 833.
Sec. 7306. Tax exemption for high-risk insurance pools.
            Part 2--Tax Treatment of Section 501(c)(3) Bonds

Sec. 748. Tax treatment of 501(c)(3) bonds similar to governmental 
                            bonds.
   Subtitle D--Tax Treatment of Long-Term Care Insurance and Services

Sec. 7401. Qualified long-term care services treated as medical care.
Sec. 7402. Treatment of long-term care insurance.
Sec. 7403. Tax treatment of accelerated death benefits under life 
                            insurance contracts.
Sec. 7404. Tax treatment of companies issuing qualified accelerated 
                            death benefit riders.
                  Subtitle E--Other Revenue Provisions

                  Part 1--Employment Status Provisions

Sec. 7501. Employment status proposal required from Department of the 
                            Treasury.
Sec. 7502. Increase in services reporting penalties.
          Part 2--Tax Incentives for Health Services Providers

Sec. 7511. Nonrefundable credit for certain primary health services 
                            providers.
Sec. 7512. Expensing of medical equipment.
                    Part 3--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 7521. Post-retirement medical and life insurance reserves.
Sec. 7522. Credit for cost of personal assistance services required by 
                            employed individuals.
Sec. 7523. Disclosure of return information for administration of 
                            certain programs under the Health Security 
                            Act.
  Subtitle F--Graduate Medical Education and Academic Health Centers 
                               Trust Fund

Sec. 7601. Establishment of Graduate Medical Education and Academic 
                            Health Centers Trust Fund.
                   TITLE VIII--OTHER FEDERAL PROGRAMS

                   Subtitle A--Indian Health Service

Sec. 8101. Purposes.
Sec. 8102. Definitions.
Sec. 8103. Eligibility and health service coverage of Indians.
Sec. 8104. Supplemental Indian health care benefits.
Sec. 8105. Provision of health services to non-Indians.
Sec. 8106. Essential community providers.
Sec. 8107. Payment by other providers.
Sec. 8108. Contracting authority.
Sec. 8109. Consultation.
Sec. 8110. Transitional studies.
Sec. 8111. Loans and loan guarantees.
Sec. 8112. Simplification of billing.
Sec. 8113. Long-term care demonstrations.
Sec. 8114. Technical assistance.
Sec. 8115. Public health programs.
Sec. 8116. Survey of health services available to Indian veterans.
Sec. 8117. Rule of construction.
Sec. 8118. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 8119. Funding methodology.
            TITLE IX--WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES

Sec. 9000. Application of information requirements.
Sec. 9001. Provision of care in disputed cases.
Sec. 9002. Demonstration projects.
Sec. 9003. Commission on Workers Compensation Medical Services.
                       TITLE X--PREMIUM FINANCING

     Subtitle A--National Health Care Cost and Coverage Commission

Sec. 10001. National Health Care Cost And Coverage Commission.
Sec. 10002. Composition.
Sec. 10003. Duties of Commission.
Sec. 10004. Congressional consideration of Commission recommendations.
Sec. 10005. Operation of the Commission.
Subtitle B--Employer and Individual Premium Requirements and Assistance

Sec. 10101. Application of subtitle.
Sec. 10102. Definitions.
                   Part 1--Employer Premium Payments

Sec. 10111. Obligation.
Sec. 10112. Community-rated employers.
Sec. 10113. Experience rated employers.
                Part 2--Family Payment Responsibilities

                        SUBPART A--FAMILY SHARE

Sec. 10131. Enrollment and premium payments.
Sec. 10132. Family share of premiums.
Sec. 10133. Amount of premium.
Sec. 10134. Collection shortfall add-on.
Sec. 10135. Family credit.
Sec. 10136. Premium subsidy.
Sec. 10137. No loss of coverage.
        SUBPART B--PAYMENT OF FAMILY CREDIT BY CERTAIN FAMILIES

Sec. 10141. Payment of family credit by nonworking and part-time 
                            certain families.
Sec. 10142. Limitation of liability based on income.
            TITLE XI--ENSURING HEALTH CARE REFORM FINANCING

Sec. 11001. Ensuring health care reform financing.

  TITLE I--IMPROVED ACCESS TO STANDARDIZED AND AFFORDABLE HEALTH PLANS

       Subtitle A--Rules and Definitions of General Applicability

                 PART 1--RULES OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY

SEC. 1001. ACCESS TO STANDARDIZED COVERAGE.

    (a) In General.--A participating State system shall require that 
each health plan (whether insured or self-insured) or long-term care 
policy issued, sold, offered for sale, or operated in the State shall 
be certified by the appropriate certifying authority as one of the 
following:
            (1) A certified standard health plan.
            (2) A certified supplemental health benefits plan.
            (3) A certified long-term care policy under part 2 of 
        subtitle B of title II.
    (b) Federal Certification of Multistate Self-Insured Plans.--For 
Federal certification of multistate self-insured health plans, see 
section 1482.

SEC. 1002. STANDARD HEALTH PLAN PRINCIPLES.

    In accordance with this Act, the following principles shall apply 
to all standard health plans:
            (1) No standard health plan may discriminate on the basis 
        of medical history, health status, pre-existing medical 
        conditions, or genetic predisposition to medical conditions.
            (2) A standard health plan--
                    (A) shall offer an annual open enrollment period 
                and accept all eligible individuals for coverage;
                    (B) shall not impose a rider that serves to exclude 
                coverage to an individual; and
                    (C) shall not impose waiting periods before 
                coverage begins.
            (3) A standard health plan shall ensure that all medically 
        necessary or appropriate services, as defined in the benefits 
        package, are provided.
            (4) Health benefits coverage shall be portable from one 
        standard health plan to another.
Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to relieve a standard 
health plan of any obligation or requirement imposed under this Act.

SEC. 1003. PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE.

    Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting the 
following:
            (1) An individual from purchasing any health care services.
            (2) An individual from purchasing supplemental insurance 
        (offered consistent with this Act) to cover health care 
        services not included within the standard benefits package 
        established under subtitle C.
            (3) An individual who is not an eligible individual from 
        purchasing health insurance.
            (4) Employers from providing coverage for benefits in 
        addition to such standard benefits package (subject to part 1 
        of subtitle D).
            (5) An individual from obtaining (at the expense of such 
        individual) health care from any health care provider of such 
        individual's choice.

                          PART 2--DEFINITIONS

SEC. 1011. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS.

    Except as otherwise specifically provided, in this Act the 
following definitions and rules apply:
            (1) Health plan.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``health plan'' means any 
                plan or arrangement which provides, or pays the cost 
                of, health benefits. Such term does not include the 
                following, or any combination thereof:
                            (i) Coverage only for accidental death or 
                        dismemberment.
                            (ii) Coverage providing wages or payments 
                        in lieu of wages for any period during which 
                        the employee is absent from work on account of 
                        sickness or injury.
                            (iii) A medicare supplemental policy (as 
                        defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social 
                        Security Act).
                            (iv) Coverage issued as a supplement to 
                        liability insurance.
                            (v) Worker's compensation or similar 
                        insurance.
                            (vi) Automobile medical-payment insurance.
                            (vii) A long-term care policy, including a 
                        nursing home fixed indemnity policy (unless the 
                        Secretary determines that such a policy 
                        provides sufficiently comprehensive coverage of 
                        a benefit so that it should be treated as a 
                        health plan).
                            (viii) An equivalent health care program.
                            (ix) Such other plan or arrangement as the 
                        Secretary determines is not a health plan.
                Such term includes any plan or arrangement not 
                described in any preceding subparagraph which provides 
                for benefit payments, on a periodic basis, for a 
                specified disease or illness or period of 
                hospitalization without regard to the costs incurred or 
                services rendered during the period to which the 
                payments relate.
                    (B) Insured health plan.--
                            (i) In general.--The term ``insured health 
                        plan'' means any health plan which is a 
                        hospital or medical service policy or 
                        certificate, hospital or medical service plan 
                        contract, or health maintenance organization 
                        group contract offered by a carrier.
                            (ii) Carrier.--The term ``carrier'' means a 
                        licensed insurance company, a hospital or 
                        medical service corporation (including an 
                        existing Blue Cross or Blue Shield 
                        organization, within the meaning of section 
                        833(c)(2) of Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as 
                        in effect before the date of the enactment of 
                        this Act), a health maintenance organization, 
                        or other entity licensed or certified by the 
                        State to provide health insurance or health 
                        benefits. The Secretary may issue regulations 
                        that provide for affiliated carriers to be 
                        treated as a single carrier where appropriate 
                        under this Act.
                    (C) Self-insured health plan.--The term `self-
                insured health plan' means an employee welfare benefit 
                plan, church plan, or other arrangement which--
                            (i) provides health benefits funded in a 
                        manner other than through the purchase of one 
                        or more insured health plans, but
                            (ii) does not include any coverage or 
                        insurance described in clauses (i) through (ix) 
                        of subparagraph (A).
            (2) Certified standard health plan.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``certified standard 
                health plan'' means a standard health plan which is 
                certified by the appropriate certifying authority as 
                meeting the other applicable requirements of this 
                title.
                    (B) Standard health plan.--The term ``standard 
                health plan'' means a health plan which provides for 
                the standard benefits package or the alternative 
                standard benefits package established under subtitle C.
            (3) Certified supplemental health benefits plan.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``certified supplemental 
                health benefits plan'' means a supplemental health 
                benefits plan which is certified by the appropriate 
                certifying authority as meeting the applicable 
                requirements of part 4 of subtitle B.
                    (B) Supplemental health benefits plan.--The term 
                ``supplemental health benefits plan'' means an insured 
                or self-insured health plan which provides health 
                benefits which consist of supplemental services or 
                cost-sharing described in part 4 of subtitle B. Such 
                term does not include a plan which provides for benefit 
                payments, on a periodic basis, for a specified disease 
                or illness or period of hospitalization without regard 
                to the costs incurred or services rendered during the 
                period to which the payments relate.
            (4) Certified long-term care insurance policy.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``certified long-term 
                care insurance policy'' means a long-term care 
                insurance policy which is certified by the applicable 
                certifying authority as meeting the applicable 
                requirements of part 2 of subtitle B of title II.
                    (B) Long-term care insurance policy.--The term 
                ``long-term care insurance policy'' has the meaning 
                given such term by section 2721.
            (5) Terms and rules relating to community and experience 
        rating.--
                    (A) Community-rated plan.--The term ``community-
                rated plan'' means a health plan provided to community-
                rated individuals which meets the requirements of 
                section 1116.
                    (B) Community-rated employer.--The term 
                ``community-rated employer'' means, with respect to an 
                employee, an employer that is not an experience-rated 
                employer with respect to such employee.
                    (C) Community-rated individual.--The term 
                ``community-rated individual'' means an individual who 
                is not an experience-rated individual.
                    (D) Experience-rated plan.--
                            (i) In general.--The term ``experience-
                        rated plan'' means a health plan which--
                                    (I) is a self-insured health plan 
                                of an experience-rated employer, or
                                    (II) is an insured health plan 
                                which is experience-rated,
                        but any such plan may cover only experience-
                        rated individuals.
                            (ii) Community rating of government 
                        plans.--Such term shall not include a 
                        government plan of a State or local government.
                    (E) Experience-rated employer.--
                            (i) In general.--The term ``experience-
                        rated employer'' means, with respect to any 
                        calendar year--
                                    (I) any employer if, on each of 20 
                                days during the preceding calendar year 
                                (each day being in a different week), 
                                such employer (or any predecessor) 
                                employed more than 500 employees for 
                                some portion of the day; or
                                    (II) a multiemployer plan or rural 
                                electric cooperative or rural telephone 
                                cooperative association plan that 
                                covers 500 or more individuals.
                            (ii) Special rule for leasing businesses.--
                        In the case of an employer the primary trade or 
                        business of which is employee leasing--
                                    (I) all of the employees which such 
                                employer leases to other employers 
                                shall be treated as community-rated 
                                individuals, and
                                    (II) this Act shall be applied 
                                separately with respect to its other 
                                employees.
                            (iii) U.S. postal service.--Such term 
                        includes the United States Postal Service.
                    (F) Experience-rated individual.--The term 
                ``experience-rated individual'' means an individual who 
                is an employee of an experience-rated employer or a 
                member of a plan described in subparagraph (E)(i)(II).
            (6) Special rule for spouses and dependents.--If any 
        individual is offered coverage under a health plan as the 
        spouse or a dependent of a primary enrollee of such plan, such 
        individual shall have the status of such enrollee unless such 
        individual is eligible to elect other coverage and so elects.

SEC. 1012. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME.

    Except as otherwise specifically provided, in this Act the 
following definitions and rules apply:
            (1) Employer, employee, employment, and wages defined.--
        Except as provided in this section--
                    (A) the terms ``wages'' and ``employment'' have the 
                meanings given such terms under section 3121 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
                    (B) the term ``employee'' has the meaning given 
                such term under section 3121 of such Code, subject to 
                the provisions of chapter 25 of such Code, and
                    (C) the term ``employer'' has the same meaning as 
                the term ``employer'' as used in such section 3121.
            (2) Exceptions.--For purposes of paragraph (1)--
                    (A) Employment.--
                            (i) Employment included.--Paragraphs (1), 
                        (2), (5), (7) (other than clauses (i) through 
                        (iv) of subparagraph (C) and clauses (i) 
                        through (v) of subparagraph (F)), (8), (9), 
                        (10), (11), (13), (15), (18), and (19) of 
                        section 3121(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
                        1986 shall not apply.
                            (ii) Exclusion of inmates as employees.--
                        Employment shall not include services performed 
                        in a penal institution by an inmate thereof or 
                        in a hospital or other health care institution 
                        by a patient thereof.
                    (B) Wages.--Paragraph (1) of section 3121(a) of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not apply.
                    (C) Employees.--
                            (i) Treatment of self-employed.--The term 
                        ``employee'' includes a self-employed 
                        individual.
                            (ii) Exclusion of certain foreign 
                        employment.--The term ``employee'' does not 
                        include an individual with respect to service, 
                        if the individual is not a citizen or resident 
                        of the United States and the service is 
                        performed outside the United States.
            (3) Aggregation rules for employers.--For purposes of this 
        Act--
                    (A) all employers treated as a single employer 
                under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as a 
                single employer, and
                    (B) under regulations of the Secretary of Labor, 
                all employees of organizations which are under common 
                control with one or more organizations which are exempt 
                from income tax under subtitle A of the Internal 
                Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as employed by a 
                single employer.
        The regulations prescribed under subparagraph (B) shall be 
        based on principles similar to the principles which apply to 
        taxable organizations under subparagraph (A).

SEC. 1013. OTHER GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

    Except as otherwise specifically provided, in this Act the 
following definitions apply:
            (1) Appropriate certifying authority.--The term 
        ``appropriate certifying authority'' means--
                    (A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), in the 
                case of a standard health plan, a supplemental health 
                benefits plan, or a long-term care insurance plan, the 
                State commissioner or superintendent of insurance or 
                other State authority in the participating State; or
                    (B) in the case of a multistate self-insured health 
                plan or a multistate self-insured supplemental health 
                benefits plan, the Secretary of Labor.
            (2) Community rating area.--The term ``community rating 
        area'' means an area specified by a State under section 
        1502(a).
            (3) Equivalent health care program.--The term ``equivalent 
        health care program'' means--
                    (A) part A or part B of the medicare program under 
                title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
                    (B) the medicaid program under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act,
                    (C) the health care program for active military 
                personnel under title 10, United States Code,
                    (D) the veterans health care program under chapter 
                17 of title 38, United States Code,
                    (E) the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the 
                Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS), as defined in section 
                1073(4) of title 10, United States Code,
                    (F) the Indian health service program under the 
                Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1601 et 
                seq.), and
                    (G) a State single-payer system approved by the 
                Secretary under subpart B of part 3 of subtitle F.
            (4) Essential community provider.--The term ``essential 
        community provider'' means an entity certified as such a 
        provider under subpart B of part 2 of subtitle E.
            (5) Health plan sponsor.--The term ``health plan sponsor'' 
        means--
                    (A) with respect to a community-rated plan, the 
                carrier providing the plan,
                    (B) with respect to an insured experience-rated 
                plan, the carrier providing the plan, and
                    (C) with respect to a self-insured experience-rated 
                plan, the experience-rated employer providing the plan.
            (6) Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means 
        the health insurance program under title XVIII of the Social 
        Security Act.
            (7) Medicare-eligible individual.--The term ``medicare-
        eligible individual'' means an individual who is entitled to 
        benefits under part A of the medicare program.
            (8) Multiemployer plan.--The term ``multiemployer plan'' 
        has the meaning given such term in section 3(37) of the 
        Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and includes 
        any plan that is treated as such a plan under title I of such 
        Act.
            (9) NAIC.--The term ``NAIC'' means the National Association 
        of Insurance Commissioners.
            (10) Participating provider.--The term ``participating 
        provider'' means, with respect to a health plan, a provider of 
        health care services who is a member of a provider network of 
        the plan.
            (11) Participating state.--The term ``participating State'' 
        means a State establishing a State program under this title.
            (12) Purchasing cooperative.--The term ``purchasing 
        cooperative'' means a health insurance cooperative established 
        under part 2 of subtitle D.
            (13) Residence.--
                    (A) In general.--An individual is considered to 
                reside in the location in which the individual 
                maintains a primary residence (as established under 
                rules of the Secretary).
                    (B) Multiple residences.--Under such rules and 
                subject to section 1112, in the case of an individual 
                who maintains more than one residence, the primary 
                residence of the individual shall be determined taking 
                into account the proportion of time spent at each 
                residence.
                    (C) Couple.--In the case of a couple only one 
                spouse of which is a qualifying employee, except as the 
                Secretary may provide, the residence of the employee 
                shall be the residence of the couple.
            (14) Rural electric cooperative.--The term ``rural electric 
        cooperative'' has the meaning given such term in section 
        3(40)(A)(iv) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
        1974.
            (15) Rural telephone cooperative associations.--The term 
        ``rural telephone cooperative association'' has the meaning 
        given such term in section 3(40)(A)(v) of the Employee 
        Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
            (16) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services.
            (17) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
        Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
        Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
            (18) United States.--The term ``United States'' means the 
        50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
        Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and Northern Mariana Islands.

                   Subtitle B--Health Plan Standards

           PART 1--ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICATION OF STANDARDS

SEC. 1101. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS.

    In order for a standard health plan to be eligible to be certified 
as a standard health plan by a participating State, the standard health 
plan shall meet the requirements of this Act, including the following 
uniform national standards established in this subtitle and described 
in regulations promulgated by the Secretary:
            (1) The insurance market reform standards of part 2.
            (2) The delivery system reform standards of part 3.
            (3) Standards for participation in a guaranty fund 
        established by the State under section 1505 (established by the 
        Secretary of Labor in the case of multistate self-insured 
        standard health plans).
            (4) Standards for the collection and reporting of data in 
        accordance with subtitle B of title V.
            (5) Standards for effective grievance procedures that 
        enrollees may utilize in pursuing complaints in accordance with 
        subtitle C of title V.

SEC. 1102. GENERAL RULES.

    (a) Construction.--Whenever in this subtitle a requirement or 
standard is imposed on a standard health plan, the requirement or 
standard is deemed to have been imposed on the insurer or sponsor of 
the plan or policy in relation to that plan or policy.
    (b) Use of Interim, Final Regulations.--In order to permit the 
timely implementation of the provisions of this subtitle, the Secretary 
and the Secretary of Labor are each authorized to issue regulations 
under this subtitle on an interim basis that become final on the date 
of publication, subject to change based on subsequent public comment.

                    PART 2--INSURANCE MARKET REFORM

SEC. 1111. GUARANTEED ISSUE, AVAILABILITY, AND RENEWABILITY.

    (a) Guaranteed Issue.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, a standard health plan sponsor--
            (1) offering a community-rated standard health plan shall 
        offer such plan to any community-rated individual applying for 
        coverage (either directly with the plan or through an employer 
        or a purchasing cooperative); and
            (2) offering an experience-rated standard health plan shall 
        offer such plan to any experience-rated individual eligible for 
        coverage under the plan through such individual's experience-
        rated employer.
No plan may engage in any practice that has the effect of attracting or 
limiting enrollees on the basis of personal characteristics, such as 
occupation or affiliation with any person or entity, or those 
characteristics described in section 1602.
    (b) Availability.--
            (1) In general.--A community-rated standard health plan 
        shall be made available to community-rated individuals 
        throughout the entire community rating area in which such plan 
        is offered, including through any employer purchasing 
        cooperative choosing to offer such plan.
            (2) Geographic limitations.--
                    (A) Nonnetwork plans.--A community-rated nonnetwork 
                plan (as defined in section 1127(d(2)(A)) may deny 
                coverage under the plan to a community-rated individual 
                who resides outside the community rating area in which 
                such plan is offered.
                    (B) Network plans.--A community-rated network plan 
                (as defined in section 1127(e)(5)(A)) may deny coverage 
                under the plan to a community-rated individual who 
                resides outside the health plan service area in which 
                such plan is offered.
                    (C) Rules regarding denials.--No denial may be made 
                under subparagraph (A) or (B) unless such denial is 
                applied uniformly, without regard to health status, 
                insurability of individuals, or other characteristics 
                described in section 1602.
            (3) Capacity limitations.--
                    (A) In general.--With the approval of the 
                appropriate regulatory authority, a standard health 
                plan may limit enrollment because of the plan's 
                capacity to deliver services or to maintain financial 
                stability. If such a limitation is imposed, the 
                limitation may not be imposed on a basis of personal 
                characteristics, such as occupation or affiliation with 
                any person or entity, or those characteristics 
                described in section 1602.
                    (B) Restrictions.--If such a limitation is 
                imposed--
                            (i) the plan may only enroll individuals 
                        under the plan consistent with rules 
                        established by the State consistent with 
                        subparagraph (C); and
                            (ii) the plan may not discriminate based on 
                        the method through which a family seeks 
                        enrollment under the plan.
                    (C) State oversight.--Each State shall, in 
                accordance with rules promulgated by the Secretary, 
                establish procedures and methods to assure equal 
                opportunity of enrollment for all families, regardless 
                of when during the open enrollment period, or the 
                method by which, the enrollment has been sought.
    (c) Renewability; Limitation on Termination.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
        (3), a standard health plan that is issued to an individual 
        shall be renewed, at the option of the individual.
            (2) Grounds for refusal to renew or terminate.--A standard 
        health plan sponsor may refuse to renew, or may terminate, a 
        standard health plan under this title only for--
                    (A) in the case of plan in a participating State 
                and any community rating area in such State with 
                respect to which the requirements of title X have not 
                become effective, nonpayment of premiums;
                    (B) fraud on the part of the individual relating to 
                such plan; or
                    (C) misrepresentation of material facts on the part 
                of the individual relating to an application for 
                coverage or claim for benefits.
            (3) Termination of plans.--A standard health plan may elect 
        not to renew or make available the standard health plan through 
        a particular type of delivery system in a community rating 
        area, but only if the standard health plan--
                    (A) elects not to renew all of its standard health 
                plans using such delivery system in such community 
                rating area; and
                    (B) provides notice to the appropriate certifying 
                authority and each individual covered under the plan of 
                such termination at least 180 days before the date of 
                expiration of the plan.
In such case, a standard health plan sponsor may not provide for the 
issuance of any standard health plan using such a delivery system in 
such community rating area during a 5-year period beginning on the date 
of the termination of the last plan not so renewed. For purposes of 
this paragraph, the term ``delivery system'' means a delivery system 
used by a network plan (as defined in section 1128(e)(5)(A)) or a 
nonnetwork plan.
    (d) Certain Excluded Plans.--The provisions of this section, other 
than subsections (c) and (e)(2)(B), shall not apply to any religious 
fraternal benefit society in existence as of September 1993, which 
bears the risk of providing insurance to its members, and which is an 
organization described in section 501(c)(8) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 which is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such 
Code.
    (e) Application of Interim Standards.--
            (1) In general.--During the interim standards application 
        period, a health plan sponsor may only offer a health plan in a 
        State if such plan sponsor publicly discloses the health plans 
        such sponsor offers in the State and each offered plan meets 
        the standards specified in paragraph (2).
            (2) Specified standards.--
                    (A) Issue and availability.--The standards 
                specified in subsections (a) and (b) if the individual 
                or group applies for coverage during the open 
                enrollment period required under section 1112(h).
                    (B) Renewal.--The standards specified in subsection 
                (c), except paragraph (3) shall be applied by 
                substituting ``State'' for ``community rating area''.
            (3) Interim standards application periods.--The interim 
        standards application period is--
                    (A) in the case of the standard specified in 
                paragraph (2)(A), on or after January 1, 1995, and 
                before January 1, 1997; and
                    (B) in the case of the standard specified in 
                paragraph (2)(B), on or after August 1, 1994, and 
                before January 1, 1997.
            (4) Preemption.--The requirements of this subsection do not 
        preempt any State law unless State law directly conflicts with 
        such requirements. The provision of additional protections 
        under State law shall not be considered to directly conflict 
        with such requirements. The Secretary may issue letter 
        determinations with respect to whether this subsection preempts 
        a provision of State law.
            (5) Construction.--The provisions of this subsection shall 
        be construed in a manner that assures, to the greatest extent 
        practicable, continuity of health benefits under health plans 
        in effect on the effective date of this title.
            (6) Special rules for acquisitions and transfers.--The 
        Secretary may issue regulations regarding the application of 
        this subsection in the case of health plans (or groups of such 
        plans) which are transferred from one health plan sponsor to 
        another sponsor through assumption, acquisition, or otherwise.

SEC. 1112. ENROLLMENT.

    (a) In General.--Each standard health plan shall establish an 
enrollment process consistent with this section.
    (b) Annual Open Enrollment Period.--Each standard health plan shall 
permit eligible individuals to enroll (or change enrollment) in the 
plan during each annual open enrollment period for each community 
rating area specified by the appropriate certifying authority under 
section 1503.
    (c) Additional Periods of Authorized Changes in Enrollment.--
            (1) In general.--Each standard health plan shall provide 
        for changes in enrollment with respect to such other periods 
        and occurrences (including changes in residence, appropriate 
        changes in employment, and the insolvency of carriers or 
        experience-rated employers) for which an individual is 
        authorized to change enrollment in standard health plans, as 
        the Secretary shall specify.
            (2) Disenrollment for Cause.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish 
                procedures by which individuals enrolled in a standard 
                health plan may disenroll from such plan for good cause 
                (as defined by Secretary) at any time during a year and 
                enroll in another standard health plan. Such procedures 
                shall be implemented by participating States in a 
                manner that ensures continuity of coverage for the 
                standard benefits package or the alternative standard 
                benefits package for such individuals during the year.
                    (B) Additional remedies.--In the case of an 
                individual who changes enrollment from a plan for good 
                cause due to a pattern of underservice under a plan, 
                the Secretary may provide rules under which the carrier 
                providing the standard health plan is liable, to the 
                subsequent standard health plan in which the individual 
                is enrolled, for excess costs (as identified in 
                accordance with such rules) during the period for which 
                it may be reasonably anticipated that the individual 
                would (but for such cause) have continued enrollment 
                with the original standard health plan.
    (d) Effectiveness of Change of Enrollment.--Except as the Secretary 
may provide, changes in enrollment during an annual open enrollment 
period under subsection (a) shall take effect as determined by the 
appropriate certifying authority. The Secretary shall also provide when 
a change of enrollment under subsection (c) becomes effective.
    (e) Direct Enrollment.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), each community-
        rated standard health plan shall provide for the direct 
        enrollment of community-rated individuals in the plan under 
        methods and procedures established by the Secretary.
            (2) Enrollment processes.--The Secretary shall provide 
        standards for States to ensure the broad availability and 
        processing of enrollment forms, including direct enrollment 
        through the mail, and other such processes as the Secretary may 
        designate.
    (f) Marketing Fees.--A community-rated standard health plan may 
impose a marketing fee surcharge for community-rated individuals 
enrolling in the plan through an agent, broker, or other authorized 
sales method, or through a direct enrollment process. Such surcharge 
shall be in addition to the highest marketing fee of such plan for 
community-rated individuals enrolled in such a plan through any 
purchasing cooperative in the community rating area.
    (g) Change of Enrollment.--As used in this section, the term 
``change of enrollment'' includes, with respect to an individual--
            (1) a change in the standard health plan in which the 
        individual is enrolled,
            (2) a change in the type of family enrollment, and
            (3) the enrollment of the individual at the time the 
        individual's status changes to a community-rated individual, 
        experience-rated individual, or a premium subsidy-eligible 
        individual under section 6002.
    (h) Application of Interim Standard.--
            (1) In general.--During the interim standard application 
        period, a health plan sponsor may only offer a health plan in a 
        State if such plan sponsor publicly discloses the health plans 
        such sponsor offers in the State and each offered plan provides 
        for an annual open enrollment period of at least 30 days.
            (2) Interim standard application periods.--The interim 
        standard application period is on or after January 1, 1995, and 
        before January 1, 1997.
            (3) Application of rules.--Paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) of 
        section 1111(d) shall apply to this subsection.

SEC. 1113. COVERAGE OF DEPENDENTS.

    (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a 
standard health plan shall enroll all members of the same family (as 
defined in subsection (b)).
    (b) Family Defined.--In this Act, unless otherwise provided, the 
term ``family''--
            (1) means, with respect to an individual who is not a child 
        (as defined in subsection (c)), the individual; and
            (2) includes the following persons (if any):
                    (A) The individual's spouse.
                    (B) The individual's children (and, if applicable, 
                the children of the individual's spouse).
    (c) Classes of Enrollment; Terminology.--
            (1) In general.--In this Act, each of the following is a 
        separate class of enrollment:
                    (A) Coverage only of an individual (referred to in 
                this Act as the ``individual'' enrollment or class of 
                enrollment).
                    (B) Coverage only of a child (referred to in this 
                Act as the `single child' enrollment or class of 
                enrollment).
                    (C) Coverage only of one or more children (referred 
                to in this Act as the `multiple children' enrollment or 
                class of enrollment).
                    (D) Coverage of a married couple without children 
                (referred to in this Act as the ``couple-only'' 
                enrollment or class of enrollment).
                    (E) Coverage of an individual and one or more 
                children (referred to in this Act as the ``single 
                parent'' enrollment or class of enrollment).
                    (F) Coverage of a married couple and one or more 
                children (referred to in this Act as the ``dual 
                parent'' enrollment or class of enrollment).
            (2) References to family and couple classes of 
        enrollment.--In this Act:
                    (A) Family.--The terms ``family enrollment'' and 
                ``family class of enrollment'', refer to enrollment in 
                a class of enrollment described in any subparagraph of 
                paragraph (1) (other than subparagraph (A)).
                    (B) Couple.--The term ``couple class of 
                enrollment'' refers to enrollment in a class of 
                enrollment described in subparagraph (D) or (F) of 
                paragraph (1).
    (d) Spouse; Married; Couple.--
            (1) In general.--In this Act, the terms ``spouse'' and 
        ``married'' mean, with respect to a person, another individual 
        who is the spouse of the person or married to the person, as 
        determined under applicable State law.
            (2) Couple.--The term ``couple'' means an individual and 
        the individual's spouse.
    (e) Child Defined.--
            (1) In general.--In this Act, except as otherwise provided, 
        the term ``child'' means an individual who is a child (as 
        determined under paragraph (3)) who--
                    (A) is under 25 years of age or is disabled, and
                    (B) is unmarried.
        The Secretary may adjust the age limitation in subparagraph (A) 
        with respect to part-time or full-time students.
            (2) Application of state law.--Subject to paragraph (3), 
        determinations of whether a person is the child of another 
        person shall be made in accordance with applicable State law.
            (3) National rules.--The Secretary may establish such 
        national rules respecting individuals who will be treated as 
        children under this Act as the Secretary determines to be 
        necessary. Such rules shall be consistent with the following 
        principles:
                    (A) Step child.--A child includes a step child who 
                is an individual living with an adult in a parent-child 
                relationship.
                    (B) Disabled child.--A child includes an unmarried 
                dependent individual regardless of age who is incapable 
                of self-support because of mental or physical 
                disability which existed before age 25.
                    (C) Certain intergenerational families.--A child 
                includes the grandchild of an individual if--
                            (i) the parent of the grandchild is a child 
                        and the parent and grandchild are living with 
                        the grandparent; or
                            (ii) the grandparent has legal custody of 
                        the grandchild.
                    (D) Treatment of emancipated minors.--An 
                emancipated minor shall not be treated as a child.
                    (E) Children placed for adoption.--
                            (i) In general.--A child includes a child 
                        who is placed for adoption with an individual, 
                        except when the child is a child in State-
                        supervised care.
                            (ii) Placed for adoption.--The term 
                        ``placed for adoption'' in connection with any 
                        placement for adoption of a child with any 
                        individual, means the assumption and retention 
                        by such individual of a legal obligation for 
                        total or partial support of such child in 
                        anticipation of the adoption of such child.
    (f) Additional Rules.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide for such 
        additional exceptions and special rules, including rules 
        relating to--
                    (A) families in which members are not residing in 
                the same area or in which children are not residing 
                with their parents,
                    (B) changes in family composition occurring during 
                a year,
                    (C) treatment of children in State-supervised care, 
                and
                    (D) treatment of children of parents who are 
                separated or divorced,
        as the Secretary finds appropriate.
            (2) Children in state-supervised care.--
                    (A) In general.--In the case of a child in State-
                supervised care (as described in subparagraph (B)), the 
                child shall be considered as a family of one and 
                enrolled by the State agency who has been awarded 
                temporary or permanent custody of the child (or which 
                has legal responsibility for the child) in a high cost-
                sharing plan unless the State agency has established a 
                special health service delivery system designated to 
                customize and more efficiently provide health services 
                to children in State-supervised care, in which case the 
                State agency will enroll the child in the plan 
                appropriate to ensure access to such a special health 
                service delivery system.
                    (B) Children in state-supervised care.--For 
                purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``child in 
                State-supervised care'' means any child who is residing 
                away from the child's parents and is temporarily or 
                permanently, on a voluntary or involuntary basis, under 
                the responsibility of a public child welfare or 
                juvenile services agency or court. Such term includes 
                any child who is not yet made a ward of the court or 
                adjudicated as a delinquent residing in emergency 
                shelter care, any child in the physical custody of 
                public or private agencies, and any child who is with 
                foster parents, or other group or residential care 
                providers. Such term also includes any child who is 
                legally adopted and for whom the Federal or State 
                government is providing adoption assistance payments.
    (g) Application of Interim Standards.--
            (1) In general.--During the interim standards application 
        period, a health plan sponsor may only offer a health plan in a 
        State if such plan meets the standards specified in this 
        section.
            (2) Interim standards application periods.--The interim 
        standards application period is on or after January 1, 1995, 
        and before January 1, 1997.
            (3) Application of rules.--Paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) of 
        section 1111(d) shall apply to this subsection.

SEC. 1114. NONDISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS.

    (a) No Limits on Coverage; No Pre-Existing Condition Limits.--
Except as provided in subsection (b), a standard health plan may not--
            (1) terminate, restrict, or limit coverage or establish 
        premiums based on the health status, medical condition, claims 
        experience, receipt of health care, medical history, 
        anticipated need for health care services, disability, or lack 
        of evidence of insurability of an individual;
            (2) terminate, restrict, or limit coverage in any portion 
        of the plan's community rating area, except as provided in 
        section 1111(b)(2);
            (3) except as provided in section 1111(c)(2), cancel 
        coverage for any community-rated individual until that 
        individual is enrolled in another applicable standard health 
        plan;
            (4) impose waiting periods before coverage begins; or
            (5) impose a rider that serves to exclude coverage of 
        particular individuals or particular health conditions.
    (b) Treatment of Preexisting Condition Exclusions.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (4), before January 
        1, 2002, a standard health plan may impose a limitation or 
        exclusion of benefits relating to treatment of a condition 
        based on the fact that the condition preexisted the effective 
        date of the plan with respect to an individual if--
                    (A) the condition was diagnosed or treated during 
                the 3-month period ending on the day before the date of 
                enrollment under the plan;
                    (B) the limitation or exclusion extends for a 
                period not more than 6 months after the date of 
                enrollment under the plan;
                    (C) the limitation or exclusion does not apply to 
                an individual who, as of the date of birth, was covered 
                under the plan; or
                    (D) the limitation or exclusion does not relate to 
                pregnancy.
            (2) Continuous coverage.--A standard health plan shall 
        provide that if an individual under such plan is in a period of 
        continuous coverage with respect to particular services as of 
        the date of enrollment under such plan, any period of exclusion 
        of coverage with respect to a preexisting condition as 
        permitted under paragraph (1) shall be prohibited.
            (3) Definitions.--As used in this subsection:
                    (A) Period of continuous coverage.--The term 
                ``period of continuous coverage'' means, with respect 
                to particular services, the period beginning on the 
                date an individual is enrolled under a standard health 
                plan or an equivalent health care program which 
                provides benefits with respect to such services and 
                ends on the date the individual is not so enrolled for 
                a continuous period of more than 3 months.
                    (B) Preexisting condition.--The term ``preexisting 
                condition'' means, with respect to coverage under a 
                standard health plan, a condition which was diagnosed, 
                or which was treated, within the 3-month period ending 
                on the day before the first date of such coverage 
                (without regard to any waiting period).
            (4) No exclusion during amnesty period or with respect to a 
        subsidy-eligible individual.--This subsection shall not apply--
                    (A) during the first annual open enrollment period 
                specified by the appropriate certifying authority under 
                section 1503, and
                    (B) with respect to the enrollment of an individual 
                eligible for a premium subsidy under subtitle A of 
                title VI.
    (c) Application of Interim Standard.--
            (1) In general.--During the interim standard application 
        period, a health plan sponsor may only offer a health plan in a 
        State if such plan meets the standard specified in paragraph 
        (2).
            (2) Specified standards.--
                    (A) Exclusion.--The standards specified in 
                subsection (b) by substituting--
                            (i) ``6-month'' for ``3-month'' in 
                        paragraph (1)(A), and
                            (ii) ``major medical insurance plan or 
                        other plan offering coverage similar to the 
                        benefits included in the standard benefits 
                        package as established under subtitle C'' for 
                        ``standard health plan''.
                    (B) Coverage.--A self-insured health plan may not 
                reduce or limit coverage of any condition or course of 
                treatment that is expected to cost more than $2,500 
                during any 12-month period.
            (3) Interim standards application period.--The interim 
        standards application period is--
                    (A) in the case of the standard specified in 
                paragraph (2)(A), on or after January 1, 1995, and 
                before January 1, 1997, and
                    (B) in the case of the standard specified in 
                paragraph (2)(B), on or after August 1, 1994, and 
                before January 1, 1997.
            (4) Application of rules.--Paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) of 
        section 1111(e) shall apply to this subsection.

SEC. 1115. BENEFITS.

    (a) In General.--A standard health plan shall offer to all 
enrollees in the plan the standard benefits package or the alternative 
standard benefits package established under subtitle C.
    (b) Alternative Standard Benefits Package.--
            (1) In general.--A carrier may only offer a standard health 
        plan with an alternative standard benefits package in a 
        community rating area if such carrier also offers a standard 
        health plan with a standard benefits package in such area.
            (2) Inclusion in risk adjustment and reinsurance 
        programs.--Any standard health plan with an alternative 
        standard benefits packages shall be included in any reinsurance 
        or risk adjustment program under section 1117 operating in the 
        community rating area in which such plan is offered.
            (3) Offer prohibited if mandates required.--A carrier may 
        not offer an alternative benefits package in a participating 
        State and any community rating area in such State with respect 
        to which the requirements of title X have become effective.

SEC. 1116. COMMUNITY RATING REQUIREMENTS.

    (a) Applicability.--Except as provided in subsection (e), the 
provisions of this section shall apply to community-rated standard 
health plans.
    (b) Standard Premiums With Respect to Community-Rated 
Individuals.--Subject to subsection (d), each community-rated standard 
health plan shall establish within each community rating area in which 
the plan is to be offered a standard premium for individual enrollment 
for the standard benefits package and the alternative standard benefits 
package established under subtitle C.
    (c) Uniform Premiums Within Community Rating Areas.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the standard 
        premium described in subsection (b) for all community-rated 
        individuals within a community rating area shall be the same.
            (2) Application to enrollees.--
                    (A) In general.--The premium charged for coverage 
                in a standard health plan shall be the product of--
                            (i) the standard premium (established under 
                        paragraph (1));
                            (ii) in the case of enrollment other than 
                        individual enrollment, the family adjustment 
                        factor specified under subparagraph (B); and
                            (iii) the age adjustment factor (specified 
                        under subparagraph (C)).
                    (B) Family adjustment factor.--The Secretary, in 
                consultation with the NAIC, shall develop a family 
                adjustment factor that reflects the relative actuarial 
                costs of benefit packages based on the applicable 
                family enrollment (as compared with such costs for 
                individual enrollment).
                    (C) Age adjustment factor.--The Secretary, in 
                consultation with the NAIC, shall specify, within 6 
                months of the date of the enactment of this Act, 
                uniform age categories and rating increments for age 
                adjustment factors that reflect the relative actuarial 
                costs of benefit packages among enrollees. The highest 
                age adjustment factor may not exceed twice the lowest 
                age adjustment factor for individuals 18 to 65 years of 
                age. The Secretary shall also provide for the gradual 
                phaseout of age adjustment factors by January 1, 2002.
    (d) Lower Premium Through Purchasing Cooperatives.--Notwithstanding 
any other provision of this section, no premium may be charged to a 
community-rated individual by a community-rated standard health plan in 
a community rating area which is not the same premium negotiated for 
such plan offered through any purchasing cooperative in such area.
    (e) Experience Rating.--
            (1) Applicability.--The provisions of this subsection shall 
        apply to experience-rated standard health plans.
            (2) Rating.--For purposes of applying this section to 
        experience-rated employers, the employees of the employer 
        involved shall constitute the community with respect to the 
        determination of the premium.
            (3) Premiums.--An experience-rated standard health plan may 
        not vary the premium imposed with respect to experience-rated 
        individuals enrolled in the plan, except as may be allowed 
        under this section with respect to geographic and family 
        coverage factors (as determined by the Secretary of Labor) 
        under the plan.

SEC. 1117. RISK ADJUSTMENT AND REINSURANCE.

    (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), each 
standard health plan shall participate in a standard health plan risk 
adjustment program and a reinsurance program implemented by the State 
in accordance with section 1504.
    (b) Multistate Plans.--Each multistate self-insured standard health 
plan shall participate in a reinsurance program developed by the 
Secretary of Labor under section 1482.

SEC. 1118. FINANCIAL SOLVENCY REQUIREMENTS AND CONSUMER PROTECTION 
              AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS.

    (a) Solvency Protection.--Each standard health plan shall meet 
financial solvency requirements to assure protection of enrollees with 
respect to potential insolvency. Each standard health plan shall meet 
requirements relating to capital and solvency established by the 
Secretary under section 1401(h).
    (b) Protection Against Provider Claims.--In the case of a failure 
of a standard health plan to make payments with respect to the standard 
benefits covered under the plan for any reason, an individual who is 
enrolled under the plan is not liable to any health care provider with 
respect to the provision of health services within such set of benefits 
for payments in excess of the amount for which the enrollee would have 
been liable if the plan were to have made payments in a timely manner.

                     PART 3--DELIVERY SYSTEM REFORM

SEC. 1121. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION.

    (a) In General.--Each standard health plan shall comply with the 
antidiscrimination requirements of section 1602.
    (b) Additional Antidiscrimination Requirements.--
            (1) In general.--No standard health plan may discriminate 
        on the basis of the provider's status as a member of a health 
        care profession for the purposes of selecting among providers 
        of health services for participation in a provider network, but 
        only if the State authorizes members of that profession to 
        render the services in question and such services are covered 
        in the standard benefits package established under subtitle C.
            (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1)(B) 
        shall be construed as requiring any standard health plan to:
                    (A) include in a network any individual provider;
                    (B) establish any defined ratio of different 
                categories of health professionals; or
                    (C) establish any specific utilization review or 
                internal quality standards other than that required in 
                other provisions of this Act.

SEC. 1122. QUALITY ASSURANCE STANDARDS.

    (a) In General.--Each standard health plan shall comply with the 
plan performance standards in accordance with subtitle A of title V. 
Each standard health plan shall establish procedures, including ongoing 
quality improvement procedures, to ensure that the health care services 
provided to enrollees under the plan will be provided under reasonable 
standards of quality of care consistent with prevailing professionally 
recognized standards of medical practice and the quality standards 
established under subtitle A of title V.
    (b) Internal Quality Assurance Program.--Each standard health plan 
shall establish, and communicate to its enrollees and its providers, an 
ongoing internal program, including periodic reporting, to monitor and 
evaluate the quality and cost effectiveness of its health care 
services, pursuant to standards established by the National Quality 
Council.

SEC. 1123. CONSUMER GRIEVANCE PROCESS.

    Each standard health plan shall demonstrate to the appropriate 
certifying authority the capability to administer the plan in a manner 
which ensures due process for all enrollees under rules established by 
the Secretary.

SEC. 1124. HEALTH SECURITY CARDS.

    Each standard health plan shall issue a health security card to 
each individual enrolled in such plan in accordance with subtitle B of 
title V and regulations promulgated by the Secretary.

SEC. 1125. INFORMATION AND MARKETING STANDARDS.

    (a) In General.--Each standard health plan shall provide 
information to the participating State and each purchasing cooperative 
through which such plan is offered in accordance with sections 1401(d) 
and 5009, other applicable information requirements of this Act, and 
rules promulgated by the Secretary.
    (b) Marketing Methods; Advertising Materials.--A standard health 
plan may utilize direct marketing, agency, or other arrangements to 
distribute health plan information, subject to applicable fair 
marketing practices laws and standards established by the State or by 
the Secretary, including standards to prevent selective marketing. All 
advertising, promotional materials, and other communications with 
health plan members and the general public must be factually accurate 
and responsive to the needs of served populations. A standard health 
plan may not distribute marketing materials to an area smaller than the 
entire community rating area of the plan.
    (c) Payment of Agent Commissions.--A standard health plan--
            (1) may pay a commission or other remuneration to an agent 
        or broker in marketing the plan to individuals or groups, but
            (2) may not vary such remuneration based, directly or 
        indirectly, on the anticipated or actual claims experience 
        associated with the group or individuals to which the plan was 
        sold.
    (d) Materials in Appropriate Languages.--In the case of a community 
rating area that includes a significant number or proportion of 
residents with limited English proficiency, each standard health plan 
in such area shall provide all materials under this Act at an 
appropriate reading level and in the native languages of such 
residents, as appropriate.

SEC. 1126. INFORMATION REGARDING A PATIENT'S RIGHT TO SELF-
              DETERMINATION IN HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Each standard health plan shall provide written 
information to each individual enrolling in such plan of such 
individual's right under State law (whether statutory or as recognized 
by the courts of the State) to make decisions concerning medical care, 
including the right to accept or refuse medical treatment and the right 
to formulate advance directives (as defined in section 1866(f)(3) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f)(3))), and the written 
policies of the standard health plan with respect to such right.
    (b) Promotion of Shared Decision Making.--Each standard health plan 
shall promote shared decision making by assuring that patients are 
appropriately informed about health care treatment options.

SEC. 1127. CONTRACTS WITH PURCHASING COOPERATIVES.

    (a) Contracts with Cooperatives.--A community-rated standard health 
plan provided by a carrier shall enter into contracts with each 
purchasing cooperative seeking such a contract in the community rating 
area served by the plan.
    (b) Pricing.--No community-rated standard health plan shall offer a 
rate to a purchasing cooperative in the community rating area served by 
the plan that is more than the premium rate determined under section 
1116. Such a plan may charge a marketing fee as specified under section 
1324(b)(1).

SEC. 1128. HEALTH PLAN ARRANGEMENTS WITH PROVIDERS.

    (a) Providers Outside Area.--A State may not limit the ability of 
any plan to contract with a provider of health services located outside 
of the geographic boundaries of a community rating area or the State.
    (b) Treatment of Cost-Sharing.--Each standard health plan which 
provides the standard benefits package shall include in its payments to 
providers such additional reimbursements as may be necessary to reflect 
cost-sharing reductions to which individuals are entitled under 
subtitle A of title VI.
    (c) Provider Verification.--Each standard health plan shall ensure 
that all health care providers reimbursed by the plan are authorized 
under State law to provide applicable services. Each standard health 
plan shall--
            (1) verify the credentials of practitioners and facilities;
            (2) ensure that all providers meet applicable State 
        licensing and certification standards;
            (3) ensure that each health care provider participating in 
        the plan annually discloses information regarding operations, 
        ownership, finances, and workforce necessary to evaluate the 
        providers compliance with this Act;
            (4) oversee the quality and performance of participating 
        providers, consistent with section 1122; and
            (5) investigate and resolve consumer complaints against 
        participating providers.
    (d) Requirements for Nonnetwork Plans.--
            (1) In general.--Each standard health plan shall 
        demonstrate, based on standards established by the Secretary, 
        arrangements with a sufficient number, distribution, and 
        variety of qualified health professionals that will accept the 
        plan's payment rates in full to ensure that all nonnetwork 
        items and services covered by the standard benefits package 
        established under subtitle C are available and accessible to 
        all enrollees throughout the community rating area with 
        reasonable promptness and in a manner which assures continuity.
            (2) Definitions relating to nonnetwork plans.--For purposes 
        of this Act:
                    (A) Nonnetwork plan defined.--The term ``nonnetwork 
                plan'' means a standard health plan that does not 
                utilize a provider network (as defined in subsection 
                (e)(5)(B)).
                    (B) Nonnetwork items and services.--The term 
                ``nonnetwork items and services'' means items or 
                services provided to an individual enrolled under a 
                standard health plan by a health care provider who is 
                not a member of a provider network of the plan.
    (e) Requirements for Network Plans.--
            (1) Agreements.--Each standard health plan shall enter into 
        agreements or have such other arrangements with a sufficient 
        number, distribution, and variety of qualified health 
        professionals within the network that will accept the plan's 
        payment rates as payments in full to ensure that all services 
        covered by the standard benefit package established under 
        subtitle C are available and accessible to all enrollees 
        throughout the health plan service area (established under 
        section 1502(d)) with reasonable promptness and in a manner 
        which assure continuity.
            (2) Gatekeeper.--With respect to each standard health plan 
        that utilizes a gatekeeper or similar process to approve health 
        care services, such plan shall ensure that such gatekeeper or 
        process does not create an undue burden for enrollees with 
        complex or chronic health conditions and shall ensure access to 
        relevant specialists for the continued care of such enrollees 
        when medically indicated. In cases of a patient with a severe, 
        complex, or chronic health condition, such plan shall 
        determine, in conjunction with the enrollee and the enrollee's 
        primary care provider, whether it is medically necessary or 
        appropriate to use a specialist or a care coordinator from an 
        interdisciplinary team as the gatekeeper or in the health care 
        approval process.
            (3) Continued care.--Each standard health plan shall 
        develop and implement mechanisms for coordinating the delivery 
        of care among different providers so as to enhance continuity 
        of care for the patient.
            (4) Eligible centers of specialized treatment expertise.--
                    (A) In general.--Each standard health plan must 
                demonstrate that adults, children, and individuals with 
                disabilities have access to specialized treatment 
                expertise when medically indicated by meeting 
                evaluation criteria established by the Secretary. In 
                establishing such criteria, the Secretary may consider 
                a process by which a standard health plan could be 
                deemed to meet such evaluation criteria if such plan 
                demonstrates referrals to designated centers of 
                specialized care when medically necessary or 
                appropriate, informs enrollees of the availability of 
                referral care, and ensures compliance with section 
                1123.
                    (B) Eligible centers.--The Secretary shall 
                establish criteria for designating centers of 
                specialized care and shall designate eligible centers 
                based on such criteria. The criteria shall include 
                requirements for staff credentials and experience, and 
                requirements for measured outcomes in the diagnosis and 
                treatment of patients. The Secretary shall develop 
                additional criteria for outcomes of specialized 
                treatment as research findings become available. To be 
                designated as a center of specialized care, a center 
                shall--
                            (i) attract patients from outside the 
                        center's local geographic region, from across 
                        the State or the Nation; and
                            (ii) either sponsor, participate in, or 
                        have medical staff who participate in peer-
                        reviewed research.
                    (C) Limitation.--A State may not establish rules or 
                policies that require or encourage standard health 
                plans to give preference to centers of specialized 
                treatment expertise within the State or within the 
                community rating area. A standard health plan shall not 
                prohibit an academic health center, teaching hospital, 
                or other center for specialized care with which it 
                contracts from contracting with one or more other 
                plans.
                    (D) Specialized treatment expertise.--For purposes 
                of this paragraph, the term ``specialized treatment 
                expertise'', with respect to the treatment of a health 
                condition by an eligible center, means expertise in 
                diagnosing and treating unusual diseases or conditions, 
                diagnosing and treating diseases or conditions which 
                are unusually difficult to diagnose or treat, and 
                providing other specialized health care.
            (5) Definitions relating to network plans.--For purposes of 
        this Act:
                    (A) Network plan defined.--The term ``network 
                plan'' means a standard health plan that utilizes a 
                provider network.
                    (B) Provider network defined.--The term ``provider 
                network'' means, with respect to a standard health 
                plan, providers that have entered into an agreement 
                with the plan under which such providers are obligated 
                to provide items and services in the standard benefits 
                package established under subtitle C to individuals 
                enrolled in the plan, or have an agreement to provide 
                services on a fee-for-service basis.
                    (C) Network items and services.--The term ``network 
                items and services'' means items or services provided 
                to an individual enrolled under a standard health plan 
                by a health care provider who is a member of a provider 
                network of the plan.
    (f) Emergency and Urgent Care Services.--
            (1) In general.--Each standard health plan shall cover 
        emergency and urgent care services provided to enrollees, 
        without regard to whether or not the provider furnishing such 
        services has a contractual (or other) arrangement with the plan 
        to provide items or services to enrollees of the plan and in 
        the case of emergency services without regard to prior 
        authorization.
            (2) Payment amounts.--In the case of emergency and urgent 
        care provided to an enrollee outside of a standard health 
        plan's community rating area, the payment amounts of the plan 
        shall be based on the applicable fee schedule described in 
        subsection (g).
    (g) Application of Plan Fee Schedule.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), each standard 
        health plan that provides for payment for services on a fee-
        for-service basis and has not established an agreement or 
        contractual arrangement with providers specifying a basis for 
        payment shall make such payment to such providers under a fee 
        schedule established by the plan.
            (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in the paragraph (1) 
        shall be construed to prevent a standard health plan from 
        providing for a different basis or level of payment than the 
        fee schedule established under such paragraph as part of a 
        contractual agreement with participating providers under the 
        plan.
    (h) Physician Participation Program; Requirement of Direct 
Billing.--
            (1) Physician participation program.--
                    (A) In general.--Each standard health plan shall 
                establish a program under which participating 
                physicians shall agree to accept the plan's payment 
                schedule as payment in full, and agree not to charge 
                patients more than the cost-sharing required by such 
                plan. Each such plan shall make available the list of 
                participating physicians to enrollees and prospective 
                enrollees.
                    (B) Coverage under agreements with plans.--The 
                agreements or other arrangements entered into under 
                subsection (e)(1) between a standard health plan and 
                the health care providers providing the standard 
                benefits package established under subtitle C to 
                individuals enrolled with the plan shall prohibit a 
                provider from engaging in balance billing described in 
                subparagraph (A).
            (2) Direct billing.--
                    (A) In general.--A provider may not charge or 
                collect from an enrollee amounts that are payable by 
                the standard health plan (including any cost-sharing 
                reduction assistance payable by the plan) and shall 
                submit charges to such plan in accordance with any 
                applicable requirements of subtitle B of title V 
                (relating to health information systems).
                    (B) Prohibition.--An individual or entity that 
                performs clinical laboratory services may not present 
                or cause to be presented, a claim, bill, or demand for 
                payment to any person other than the individual 
                receiving such services, or to the standard health plan 
                of the individual, except that the Secretary may by 
                regulation establish appropriate exceptions to the 
                requirement of this subparagraph.
            (3) Prohibition of balance billing of taxes.--Any agreement 
        entered into between a standard health plan and a provider 
        shall prohibit the provider from charging patients the amount 
        of any tax recovered from the provider under section 4518 of 
        the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
            (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be 
        construed to--
                    (A) require or force an individual to receive 
                health care solely through the individual's standard 
                health plan; or
                    (B) prohibit any individual from privately 
                contracting with any health care provider and paying 
                for the treatment or service provider by such provider 
                on a cash basis or any other basis as agreed to between 
                the individual and the provider.
    (i) Relation to Detention.--A standard health plan is not required 
to provide any reimbursement to any detention facility for services 
performed in that facility for detainees in the facility.

SEC. 1129. UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS AND PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE 
              PLANS.

    (a) Requiring Consumer Disclosure.--Each standard health plan shall 
disclose upon request to enrollees (and prospective enrollees) and to 
participating providers (and prospective providers), the protocols and 
financial incentives used by the plan, including utilization management 
protocols and physician incentive plans for controlling utilization and 
costs, while protecting proprietary business information to the extent 
specified by the Secretary.
    (b) Utilization Management.--The utilization review and management 
activities of each standard health plan, provided either directly or 
through contract, shall meet the following standards as defined by the 
Secretary:
            (1) Personnel.--All review determinations shall be made by 
        health professionals who are licensed, certified, or otherwise 
        credentialed and who are qualified to review utilization of the 
        treatment being sought.
            (2) Review process.--Each standard health plan shall base 
        utilization management on current scientific knowledge, stress 
        the efficient delivery of health care and quality outcomes, 
        rely primarily on evaluating and comparing practice patterns 
        rather than routine case-by-case review, be consistent and 
        timely in application, and have a process for making review 
        determinations for urgent and emergency care 24 hours a day.
            (3) No financial incentive.--Utilization management by each 
        standard health plan may not create financial incentives for 
        reviewers or providers to reduce or limit medically necessary 
        or appropriate services.
    (c) Physician Incentive Plans.--A standard health plan may not 
operate a physician incentive plan unless such incentive plan meets the 
requirements of section 1876(i)(8)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395mm(i)(8)(A)).

               PART 4--SUPPLEMENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS

SEC. 1141. SUPPLEMENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS.

    (a) Treatment of Supplemental Health Benefits Plans.--
            (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act may be construed as 
        preventing a standard health plan sponsor from offering and 
        pricing (in a manner that is separate from the offering and 
        pricing of the standard health plans offered by such sponsor in 
        the community rating area) supplemental health benefits plans 
        pursuant to the State certification plan, the requirements of 
        this section, and regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
            (2) Plans defined.--In this Act:
                    (A) Supplemental health benefits plan.--The term 
                ``supplemental health benefits plan'' means a 
                supplemental services plan or a cost-sharing plan.
                    (B) Supplemental services plan.--The term 
                ``supplemental services plan'' means a health plan 
                which provides--
                            (i) coverage for services and items not 
                        included in the standard benefits package 
                        established under subtitle C,
                            (ii) coverage for items and services 
                        included in such package but not covered 
                        because of a limitation in amount, duration, or 
                        scope of benefits, or
                            (iii) both.
                    (C) Cost-sharing plan.--The term ``cost-sharing 
                plan'' means a health plan which provides coverage for 
                deductibles and coinsurance imposed as part of the 
                standard benefits package established under subtitle C.
    (b) Requirements for Supplemental Services Plans.--
            (1) Application of certain health plan standards.--
                    (A) In general.--The standards specified in 
                subparagraph (B) shall apply with respect to each 
                supplemental services plan in the same manner as such 
                standards apply with respect to a certified standard 
                health plan.
                    (B) Specified standards.--The standards specified 
                in this subparagraph are as follows:
                            (i) Section 1111 (relating to guaranteed 
                        issue, availability, and renewability).
                            (ii) Section 1112 (relating to enrollment).
                            (iii) Section 1114 (relating to 
                        nondiscrimination based on health status).
                            (iv) Section 1116 (relating to rating 
                        limitations for community-rated market).
            (2) No duplicative health benefits.--A standard health plan 
        sponsor or any other entity may not offer any supplemental 
        services plan that--
                    (A) duplicates the standard benefits package 
                established under subtitle C, or
                    (B) duplicates any coverage provided under the 
                medicare program to any medicare-eligible individual.
            (3) Restrictions on marketing abuses.--Not later than May 
        1, 1995, the Secretary shall develop minimum standards that 
        prohibit marketing practices by standard health plan sponsors 
        and other entities offering supplemental services plans that 
        involve--
                    (A) providing monetary incentives for, or tying or 
                otherwise conditioning, the sale of the plan to 
                enrollees in a certified standard health plan of the 
                sponsor or entity;
                    (B) linking in any manner to the plan's standard 
                benefits package; or
                    (C) using or disclosing to any party information 
                about the health status or claims experience of 
                participants in a certified standard health plan for 
                the purpose of marketing a supplemental services plan.
    (c) Requirements for Cost-Sharing Plans.--
            (1) Rules for offering of policies.--A cost-sharing plan 
        may be offered to an individual only if--
                    (A) the plan is offered by the standard health plan 
                in which the individual is enrolled;
                    (B) the standard health plan offers the plan to all 
                individuals enrolled in the standard health plan;
                    (C) the individual is not enrolled in an 
                alternative benefits package; and
                    (D) the plan is offered only during the enrollment 
                periods for standard health plans specified in section 
                1112.
            (2) Prohibition of coverage of copayments.--A cost-sharing 
        plan may not provide any benefits relating to any copayments 
        established under subtitle C.
            (3) Equivalent coverage for all services.--A cost-sharing 
        plan shall provide coverage for items and services in the 
        standard benefits package to the same extent as the plan 
        provides coverage for all items and services in the package.
            (4) Requirements for pricing.--
                    (A) In general.--The price of any cost-sharing plan 
                shall--
                            (i) be the same for each individual or 
                        class of family to whom the plan is offered;
                            (ii) include any expected increase in 
                        utilization resulting from the purchase of the 
                        plan by individuals enrolled in the standard 
                        health plan; and
                            (iii) not result in a loss-ratio of less 
                        than 90 percent.
                    (B) Loss-ratio defined.--In subparagraph (A)(iii), 
                a ``loss-ratio'' is the ratio of the premium returned 
                to the consumer in payout relative to the total premium 
                collected.

                 Subtitle C--Benefits and Cost-Sharing

                   PART 1--STANDARD BENEFITS PACKAGES

SEC. 1201. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF STANDARD BENEFITS PACKAGES.

    (a) Standard Benefits Package.--For purposes of this title, a 
standard benefits package is a benefits package that--
            (1)(A) provides all of the items and services under the 
        categories of health care items and services described in 
        section 1202; and
            (B) provides for at least one of the 3 cost-sharing 
        schedules established under section 1213(c)(2) by the National 
        Health Benefits Board established under section 1211 (referred 
        to in this part as the ``Board'') for such a package; and
            (2) has an actuarial value that is equivalent to the 
        actuarial value of the benefits package provided by the Blue 
        Cross/Blue Shield Standard Option under the Federal Employees 
        Health Benefits Program as in effect during 1994, adjusted for 
        an average population and adjusted for the particular cost-
        sharing schedule provided for in the package.
    (b) Alternative Standard Benefits Package.--For purposes of this 
title, an alternative standard benefits package is a benefits package 
that--
            (1)(A) provides all of the items and services under the 
        categories of health care items and services described in 
        section 1202; and
            (B) provides for the very high deductible cost-sharing 
        schedule established under section 1213(c)(3) by the Board for 
        such a package; and
            (2) has an actuarial value that is less than the actuarial 
        value of the benefits package provided by the Blue Cross/Blue 
        Shield Standard Option under the Federal Employees Health 
        Benefits Program as in effect during 1994, adjusted for an 
        average population.
    (c) Actuarial Values.--The Board shall determine the actuarial 
values referred to in subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2).

SEC. 1202. DESCRIPTION OF CATEGORIES OF ITEMS AND SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--The categories of health care items and services 
described in this section are the following, as defined by the Board 
under section 1213(a):
            (1) Hospital services.--The hospital (as defined in section 
        1203(7)) services described in this paragraph include the 
        following:
                    (A) Inpatient hospital services.
                    (B) Outpatient hospital services.
                    (C) 24-hour a day hospital emergency services.
            (2) Health professional services.--The items and services 
        described in this paragraph are--
                    (A) health professional services (as defined in 
                section 1203(3)), including consultations, that are 
                provided in a home, office, or other ambulatory care 
                setting, or an institutional setting; and
                    (B) services and supplies (including drugs and 
                biologicals which cannot be self-administered) 
                furnished as incident to such health professional 
                services.
            (3) Emergency and ambulatory medical and surgical 
        services.--The items and services described in this paragraph 
        are 24-hour a day emergency services and ambulatory medical or 
        surgical services provided in a facility that is legally 
        authorized to provide such services in the State in which such 
        services are provided.
            (4) Clinical preventive services.--The items and services 
        described in this paragraph are clinical preventive services, 
        including services for high risk populations, age-appropriate 
        immunizations, tests, and clinician visits furnished consistent 
        with any periodicity schedule specified by the Board under 
        section 1213(a)(2)(B).
            (5) Mental illness and substance abuse services.--The items 
        and services described in this paragraph are mental illness and 
        substance abuse services, including inpatient, outpatient, 
        residential non-hospital, and intensive non-residential 
        services, for the treatment of mental illness and substance 
        abuse disorders (as defined in section 1203(9)).
            (6) Family planning services and services for pregnant 
        women.--The services described in this section include the 
        following items and services:
                    (A) Voluntary comprehensive family planning 
                services, including counseling and education.
                    (B) Contraceptive drugs and devices that are 
                subject to approval by the Secretary under the Federal 
                Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
                    (C) Services for pregnant women.
            (7) Hospice care.--The hospice care described in this 
        paragraph is items and services provided for end of life care 
        (as defined in section 1203(6)).
            (8) Home health care.--
                    (A) In general.--The home health care described in 
                this paragraph is home health care (as defined in 
                section 1203(4)) and home infusion drug therapy 
                services (as defined in section 1203(5)).
                    (B) Limitations.--Coverage for home health care is 
                subject to the following limitations:
                            (i) Inpatient treatment alternative.--Such 
                        care is covered only as an alternative to 
                        inpatient treatment in a hospital, skilled 
                        nursing facility (as defined in section 
                        1203(15)), or rehabilitation facility (as 
                        defined in section 1203(14)) after an illness, 
                        injury, disorder, or other health condition.
                            (ii) Reevaluation.--At the end of each 60-
                        day period of home health care, the need for 
                        continued care shall be reevaluated by the 
                        person who is primarily responsible for 
                        providing the home health care. Additional 
                        periods of care are covered only if such person 
                        determines that the requirement in clause (i) 
                        is satisfied.
            (9) Extended care services--
                    (A) In general.--The extended care services 
                described in this section are the items and services 
                described in section 1861(h) of the Social Security 
                Act, when provided to an inpatient of a skilled nursing 
                facility or a rehabilitation facility.
                    (B) Limitations.--Extended care services are 
                covered only as an alternative to receiving inpatient 
                hospital services as a result of an illness, injury, 
                disorder, or other health condition.
            (10) Ambulance services.--
                    (A) In general.--The ambulance services described 
                in this paragraph are covered only when indicated by 
                the medical condition of the individual receiving such 
                services. Such services include the following:
                            (i) Ground transportation by ambulance.
                            (ii) Air or water transportation by an 
                        aircraft or vessel equipped for transporting an 
                        injured or sick individual in cases in which 
                        there is no other method of transportation or 
                        where use of another method of transportation 
                        is contra-indicated by the medical condition of 
                        such individual.
            (11) Outpatient laboratory, radiology, and diagnostic 
        services.--The items and services described in this paragraph 
        are laboratory, radiology, and diagnostic services provided 
        upon prescription to individuals who are not inpatients of a 
        hospital, hospice, skilled nursing facility, or rehabilitation 
        facility.
            (12) Outpatient prescription drugs.--The items described in 
        this paragraph are the following used for a medically accepted 
        indication (as defined in section 1203(8)):
                    (A) Outpatient prescription drugs.
                    (B) Blood clotting factors (as defined in section 
                1203(1)).
                    (C) Drugs used for home infusion therapy.
                    (D) Biologicals.
                    (E) Accessories and supplies used directly with the 
                items described in subparagraphs (A) through (D).
            (13) Outpatient rehabilitation services.--
                    (A) In general.--The outpatient rehabilitation 
                services described in this paragraph are--
                            (i) outpatient occupational therapy;
                            (ii) outpatient physical therapy;
                            (iii) outpatient respiratory therapy; and
                            (iv) outpatient speech-language pathology 
                        services and outpatient audiology services.
                    (B) Limitations.--Coverage for outpatient 
                rehabilitation services is subject to the following 
                limitations:
                            (i) Service limitation.--Such services 
                        include only items or services used to restore 
                        or maintain functional capacity or prevent or 
                        minimize limitations on physical and cognitive 
                        functions as a result of an illness, injury, 
                        disorder, or other health condition, including 
                        attaining new functional abilities at an age-
                        appropriate rate.
                            (ii) Reevaluation.--At the end of each 60-
                        day period of outpatient rehabilitation 
                        services, the need for continued services shall 
                        be reevaluated by the person who is primarily 
                        responsible for providing the services. 
                        Additional periods of services are covered only 
                        if such person determines that the requirement 
                        of paragraph (1) is satisfied.
            (14) Durable medical equipment and prosthetic and orthotic 
        devices.--
                    (A) In general.--The items and services described 
                in this paragraph are--
                            (i) durable medical equipment (as defined 
                        in section 1203(2);
                            (ii) prosthetic devices (as defined in 
                        section 1203(12);
                            (iii) orthotics (as defined in section 
                        1203(10)) and prosthetics (as defined in 
                        section 1203(11)); and
                            (iv) accessories and supplies used directly 
                        with the equipment or devices described in 
                        clauses (i) through (iv).
                    (B) Repair, maintenance, etc.--The items and 
                services described in this paragraph include the 
                following with respect to the equipment and devices 
                described in subparagraph (A):
                            (i) Repair and maintenance of such 
                        equipment or devices.
                            (ii) Replacement of such equipment or 
                        devices when required due to loss, irreparable 
                        damage, wear, or because of a change in the 
                        patient's condition.
                            (iii) Fitting and training for the use of 
                        such equipment or devices.
            (15) Vision care, hearing aids, and dental care.--
                    (A) In general.--The items described in this 
                paragraph are the vision care described in subparagraph 
                (B), dental care described in subparagraph (C), and 
                hearing care described in subparagraph (D).
                    (B) Vision care.--The vision care described in this 
                subparagraph is routine eye examinations, diagnosis, 
                and treatment for defects in vision furnished to 
                individuals who are under 22 years of age, including 
                eyeglasses and contact lenses furnished according to a 
                periodicity schedule established by the Board.
                    (C) Dental care.--
                            (i) Individuals under 22.--The dental care 
                        described in this subparagraph shall include 
                        the following, as specified by the Board, 
                        furnished to individuals who are under 22 years 
                        of age:
                                    (I) Emergency dental treatment.
                                    (II) Prevention and diagnosis of 
                                dental disease.
                                    (III) Treatment of dental disease.
                                    (IV) Space maintenance procedures 
                                to prevent orthodontic complications.
                                    (V) Interceptive orthodontic 
                                treatment to prevent severe 
                                malocclusion.
                            (ii) Individuals over 22.--The dental care 
                        described in this subparagraph for individuals 
                        who are over 22 years of age is emergency 
                        dental treatment, as specified by the Board.
                    (D) Hearing care.--The hearing care items and 
                services described in this paragraph are the following 
                when furnished to an individual who is under 22 years 
                of age:
                            (i) Routine ear examinations and diagnosis 
                        for defects in hearing as part of a physician 
                        visit.
                            (ii) Hearing aids when recommended by a 
                        physician or audiologist.
            (16) Investigational treatments.--The items and services 
        described in this paragraph are items and services required to 
        provide patient care pursuant to the design of a qualified 
        investigational treatment (as defined in section 1203(13)).
    (b) Limitation.--
            (1) In general.--Items and services under the categories 
        described in subsection (a) shall be furnished to health plan 
        enrollees when medically necessary or appropriate.
            (2) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
        ``medically necessary or appropriate'' when referring to an 
        item or service means an item or service intended to maintain 
        or improve the biological, psychological, or functional 
        condition of a health plan enrollee or to prevent or mitigate 
        an adverse health outcome to an enrollee.

SEC. 1203. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) Blood clotting factors.--The term ``blood clotting 
        factors'' has the meaning given such term in section 
        1861(s)(2)(I) of the Social Security Act.
            (2) Durable medical equipment.--The term ``durable medical 
        equipment'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(n) 
        of the Social Security Act.
            (3) Health professional services.--The term ``health 
        professional services'' means professional services that--
                    (A) are lawfully provided by a physician; or
                    (B) would be described in subparagraph (A) if 
                provided by a physician, but are provided by another 
                person who is legally authorized to provide such 
                services in the State in which the services are 
                provided.
            (4) Home health care.--The term ``home health care'' means 
        the items and services described in section 1861(m) of the 
        Social Security Act.
            (5) Home infusion drug therapy services.--The term ``home 
        infusion drug therapy services'' means the home infusion drug 
        therapy services described in section 1861(ll) of the Social 
        Security Act.
            (6) Hospice care.--The term ``hospice care'' means the 
        items and services described in paragraph (1) of section 
        1861(dd) of the Social Security Act, except that in applying 
        such section for purposes of this paragraph--
                    (A) paragraphs (4)(B) and (5) shall be disregarded; 
                and
                    (B) all references to the Secretary of Health and 
                Human Services shall be treated as references to the 
                Board.
            (7) Hospital.--The term ``hospital'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act, except 
        that such term shall include a facility operated by the 
        uniformed services, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the 
        Indian Health Service that is primarily engaged in providing 
        services to inpatients that are equivalent to the services 
        provided by a hospital defined in such section 1861(e).
            (8) Medically accepted indication.--The term ``medically 
        accepted indication'' means with respect to the use of a drug, 
        any use which has been approved by the Food and Drug 
        Administration for the drug, and includes another use of the 
        drug if--
                    (A) the drug has been approved by the Food and Drug 
                Administration; and
                    (B) such use is supported by one or more citations 
                which are included (or approved for inclusion) in one 
                or more of the following compendia: the American 
                Hospital Formulary Service-Drug Information, the 
                American Medical Association Drug Evaluations, the 
                United States Pharmacopoeia-Drug Information, and other 
                authoritative compendia as identified by the Secretary.
            (9) Mental illness and substance abuse disorders.--The term 
        ``mental illness and substance abuse disorder'' means a mental 
        or substance abuse disorder listed in the Diagnostic and 
        Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, or the 
        International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, the 
        Clinical Modification, Third Edition, or revised versions of 
        such manuals or texts.
            (10) Orthotics.--The term ``orthotics'' includes--
                    (A) an accessory or supply used directly with a 
                prosthetic device to achieve therapeutic benefits and 
                proper functioning; and
                    (B) leg, arm, back, and neck braces.
            (11) Prosthetics.--The term ``prosthetics'' includes 
        artificial legs, arms, and eyes.
            (12) Prosthetic devices.--The term ``prosthetic devices'' 
        means devices that replace all or part of the function of a 
        body organ.
            (13) Qualified investigational treatment.--The term 
        ``qualified investigational treatment'' means an 
        investigational treatment that is part of a peer-reviewed and 
        approved research program (as defined by the Secretary) or 
        research trials approved by the Secretary, the Directors of the 
        National Institutes of Health, the Commissioner of the Food and 
        Drug Administration, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the 
        Secretary of Defense, or a qualified nongovernmental research 
        entity as defined in guidelines of the National Institutes of 
        Health, including guidelines for cancer center support grants 
        designated by the National Cancer Institute.
            (14) Rehabilitation facility.--The term ``rehabilitation 
        facility'' means an institution (or a distinct part of an 
        institution) which is established and operated for the purpose 
        of providing diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitation 
        services to individuals for rehabilitation from illness, 
        injury, disorder, or other health condition. An entity 
        qualifying as a hospital for as defined in paragraph (7) may 
        also qualify as a rehabilitation facility for the purposes of 
        section 1202(a)(9).
            (15) Skilled nursing facility.--The term ``skilled nursing 
        facility'' means an institution (or a distinct part of an 
        institution) which is primarily engaged in providing to 
        residents--
                    (A) skilled nursing care and related services for 
                residents who require medical or nursing care; or
                    (B) rehabilitation services to residents for 
                rehabilitation from illness, injury, disorder, or other 
                health condition.

                 PART 2--NATIONAL HEALTH BENEFITS BOARD

SEC. 1211. CREATION OF NATIONAL HEALTH BENEFITS BOARD; MEMBERSHIP.

    (a) In General.--There is hereby established a National Health 
Benefits Board (referred to in this part as the ``Board'').
    (b) Composition.--The Board is composed of 7 members appointed by 
the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. No 
more than 4 members of the Board may be affiliated with the same 
political party. Members shall be appointed not later than 90 days 
after the date of the enactment of this title.
    (c) Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members of the 
Board as chair.
    (d) Terms.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        term of each member of the Board is 6 years and begins when the 
        term of the predecessor of that member ends.
            (2) Initial terms.--The initial terms of the members of the 
        Board first taking office after the date of the enactment of 
        this title, shall expire as designated by the President, two at 
        the end of two years, two at the end of four years, and three 
        at the end of six years.
            (3) Continuation in office.--Upon the expiration of a term 
        of office, a member shall continue to serve until a successor 
        is appointed and qualified.
    (e) Vacancies.--
            (1) In general.--If a vacancy occurs, other than by 
        expiration of term, a successor shall be appointed by the 
        President, by and with the consent of the Senate, to fill such 
        vacancy. The appointment shall be for the remainder of the term 
        of the predecessor.
            (2) No impairment of function.--A vacancy in the membership 
        of the Board does not impair the authority of the remaining 
        members to exercise all of the powers of the Board.
            (3) Acting chair.--The Board may designate a member to act 
        as chair during any period in which there is no chair 
        designated by the President.
    (f) Meetings; Quorum.--
            (1) Meetings.--The chair shall preside at meetings of the 
        Board, and in the absence of the chair, the Board shall elect a 
        member to act as chair pro tempore.
            (2) Frequency.--The Board shall meet not less frequently 
        than 4 times each year.
            (3) Quorum.--Four members of the Board shall constitute a 
        quorum thereof.

SEC. 1212. QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD MEMBERS.

    (a) Citizenship.--Each member of the Board shall be a citizen of 
the United States.
    (b) Basis of Selection.--Board members shall be selected on the 
basis of their experience and expertise in relevant subjects, including 
the practice of medicine, nursing, or other clinical practices, health 
care financing and delivery, State health systems, consumer protection, 
business, law, and delivery of care to vulnerable populations.
    (c) Pay and Travel Expenses.--
            (1) Pay.--
                    (A) Chair.--The chair of the Board shall be paid at 
                a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum 
                annual rate of basic pay payable for level II of the 
                Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, 
                United States Code, for each day (including travel 
                time) during which the chair is engaged in the actual 
                performance of duties vested in the Board.
                    (B) Members.--Each member of the Board shall be 
                paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the 
                minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level III 
                of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 
                5, United States Code, for each day (including travel 
                time) during which the member is engaged in the actual 
                performance of duties vested in the Board.
            (2) Travel expenses.--Members of the Board shall receive 
        travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in 
        accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United 
        States Code.

SEC. 1213. GENERAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

    (a) Clarification and Refinement of Items and Services.--
            (1) In general.--The Board shall promulgate such 
        regulations or establish such guidelines as may be necessary to 
        clarify and refine the items and services under the categories 
        of health care items and services described in section 1202 in 
        accordance with the requirements of subsections (a)(2) and 
        (b)(2) of section 1201.
            (2) Schedules for items and services.--
                    (A) In general.--The Board shall establish and 
                update periodicity schedules for the items and services 
                in the categories of health care items and services 
                described in section 1202.
                    (B) Special rule with respect to clinical 
                preventive services.--With respect to clinical 
                preventive services, the Board--
                            (i) shall specify and define specific items 
                        and services as clinical preventive services 
                        and shall establish and update a periodicity 
                        schedule for such items and services; and
                            (ii) in specifying clinical preventive 
                        services and establishing and updating 
                        periodicity schedules under clause (i), the 
                        Board shall consult with experts in clinical 
                        preventive services, including the U.S. 
                        Preventive Services Task Force, the Advisory 
                        Committee on Immunization Practices, the 
                        American College of Obstetricians and 
                        Gynecologists, and the American Academy of 
                        Pediatrics.
            (3) Mental illness and substance abuse services.--
                    (A) Parity.--
                            (i) In general.--The Board shall design 
                        mental illness and substance abuse services so 
                        as to achieve parity with services for other 
                        medical conditions. Except as provided in 
                        clause (iii), day or visit limits or cost-
                        sharing requirements may not be applied to 
                        mental illness and substance abuse services 
                        that are not applied to services for other 
                        medical conditions.
                            (ii) Parity defined.--For purposes of this 
                        subparagraph, the term ``parity'' means 
                        comprehensive, coverage for all medically 
                        necessary or appropriate mental illness and 
                        substance abuse services in inpatient, 
                        outpatient, residential, and intensive non-
                        residential settings.
                            (iii) Special rule.--
                                    (I) Effect on other benefits.--If 
                                the Board determines that parity of 
                                mental illness and substance abuse 
                                services with services for other 
                                medical conditions cannot be achieved 
                                without imposing unduly burdensome 
                                cost-sharing requirements on other 
                                services, the Board may design mental 
                                illness and substance abuse services 
                                such that they include the following 
                                limits:
                                            (aa) Inpatient hospital 
                                        care may be limited, but in the 
                                        case of mental illness the 
                                        limit may not be set at a level 
                                        below 30 days per year, and in 
                                        the case of substance abuse 
                                        services the limit may not be 
                                        set at a level below the level 
                                        sufficient to provide 
                                        detoxification services.
                                            (bb) After the first 5 
                                        visits for outpatient adult 
                                        psychotherapy, the coinsurance 
                                        for such services may be set at 
                                        a level higher than the 
                                        coinsurance for other services, 
                                        but no higher than a 50 percent 
                                        coinsurance level.
                                            (cc) Consistent with the 
                                        process described in section 
                                        3510, the Board shall ensure 
                                        that parity for mental illness 
                                        and substance abuse services 
                                        with services for other medical 
                                        conditions is established no 
                                        later than January 1, 2001.
                                    (II) Legislative proposal.--If the 
                                Board finds that establishing parity 
                                for mental illness and substance abuse 
                                services with services for other 
                                medical conditions cannot be achieved 
                                by January 1, 2001, without imposing 
                                unduly burdensome cost-sharing on all 
                                services, the Board shall develop a 
                                legislative proposal for an extension 
                                of such date. Not later than January 1, 
                                2000, the Board shall submit to the 
                                Congress an implementing bill which 
                                contains such statutory provisions as 
                                are necessary or appropriate to 
                                implement the legislative proposal 
                                developed under the preceding sentence.
                    (B) Management of services.--
                            (i) In general.--The Board shall develop 
                        standards for the appropriate management of 
                        mental illness and substance abuse services. 
                        Such standards shall include quality managed 
                        care techniques.
                            (ii) Quality managed care.--For purposes of 
                        clause (i), the term ``quality managed care'' 
                        refers to the administration of benefits 
                        through methods of central intake, 
                        preauthorization, and utilization review under 
                        circumstances that protect individuals from 
                        unwarranted denial of services.
                    (C) Settings.--The Board shall give priority to 
                ensuring that mental illness and substance abuse 
                services are provided in the least restrictive setting 
                that is clinically appropriate and encouraging the use 
                of outpatient and intensive nonresidential treatments 
                to the greatest extent possible.
    (b) Determining Medical Necessity or Appropriateness.--
            (1) In general.--The Board shall be authorized to 
        establish--
                    (A) criteria for determinations of medical 
                necessity or appropriateness;
                    (B) procedures for determinations of medical 
                necessity or appropriateness; and
                    (C) regulations or guidelines to be used in 
                determining whether an item or service under the 
                categories of health care items and services described 
                in section 1202 is medically necessary or appropriate.
            (2) Requirements.--The Board shall include the following in 
        establishing criteria, procedures, and regulations under this 
        subsection:
                    (A) Special rules with respect to enrollees under 
                22 years of age.--In making any determination with 
                respect to medical necessity or appropriateness with 
                respect to an enrollee under 22 years of age, the Board 
                shall consider whether the item or service is--
                            (i) is appropriate for the age and health 
                        status of the enrollee;
                            (ii) will prevent or ameliorate the effects 
                        of a condition, illness, injury, or disorder;
                            (iii) will aid the overall physical and 
                        mental growth and development of the enrollee; 
                        or
                            (iv) will assist in achieving or 
                        maintaining maximum functional capacity in 
                        performing daily activities.
                This subparagraph shall apply to all items and services 
                under the categories of health care items and services 
                described in section 1202 as clarified and refined by 
                the Board under subsection (a).
                    (B) Consultations with expert authorities.--The 
                Board shall consider the opinions of experts from 
                academia, medical specialty groups, industry, and 
                government in establishing criteria, procedures, and 
                regulations with regard to medical necessity or 
                appropriateness.
                    (C) Recommendations to secretary.--In the absence 
                of sufficient evidence to develop regulations with 
                respect to any particular coverage determination, the 
                Board shall recommend to the Secretary specific areas 
                for which priorities should be given to undertake 
                clinical trials or establish practice guidelines.
            (3) Health plan requirements.--The regulations established 
        by the Board under this subsection shall provide that health 
        plans shall--
                    (A) in making any determination with respect to 
                medical necessity or appropriateness, consider the 
                criteria and procedures established by the Board under 
                this subsection;
                    (B) be guided by--
                            (i) the initial determination of medical 
                        necessity or appropriateness with respect to an 
                        item or service made by an enrollee and the 
                        health professional furnishing such item or 
                        service; and
                            (ii) available scientific evidence; and
                    (C) if a health plan has developed a treatment 
                guideline or utilization protocol, or has made a 
                general coverage determination, the plan shall--
                            (i) provide a copy of, and a written 
                        statement of the basis for, the guideline, 
                        protocol, or determination at least 60 days 
                        prior to the effective date of such guideline, 
                        protocol, or determination, to each affected 
                        provider with which the plan has a contract and 
                        the government entity which certifies the plan;
                            (ii) provide any or all of such information 
                        upon request to enrollees, potential enrollees, 
                        or other interested parties, including provider 
                        groups and specialty organizations; and
                            (iii) revise such guidelines, protocols, or 
                        determinations periodically, or, if new 
                        scientific evidence becomes available, as soon 
                        as possible after such evidence is available.
    (c) Cost-Sharing.--The Board shall establish cost-sharing schedules 
to be provided by health plans providing a standard benefits package or 
an alternative standard benefits package. In establishing such cost-
sharing schedules, the Board shall meet the following requirements:
            (1) Annual basis.--The Board shall review and update cost-
        sharing schedules as determined appropriate by the Board, but 
        on at least an annual basis.
            (2) Plans providing standard benefits package.--
                    (A) In general.--The Board shall establish 3 cost-
                sharing schedules for health plans providing the 
                standard benefits package which permit a variety of 
                delivery system options, including fee-for-service, 
                preferred provider organizations, point of service, and 
                managed care. Such cost-sharing schedules shall consist 
                of--
                            (i) a low cost-sharing schedule;
                            (ii) a high cost-sharing schedule; and
                            (iii) a combination cost-sharing schedule.
                    (B) Actuarial value of high cost-sharing 
                schedule.--A standard benefit package that provides for 
                the cost-sharing schedule established by the Board 
                under this paragraph that has the lowest actuarial 
                value relative to the actuarial values of all other 
                cost-sharing schedules established by the Board under 
                this paragraph, shall have an actuarial value that is 
                equivalent to the actuarial value of the benefits 
                package provided by the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Standard 
                Option under the Federal Employees Health Benefits 
                Program as in effect during 1994, adjusted for an 
                average population (as determined by the Board).
            (3) Plans providing alternative standard benefits 
        package.--The Board shall establish only one very high 
        deductible cost-sharing schedule for health plans providing the 
        alternative standard benefits package. Such cost-sharing 
        schedule shall provide for a higher deductible than any 
        deductible under a schedule established for health plans 
        providing a standard benefits package.
            (4) Clinical preventive services.--No cost-sharing schedule 
        established by the Board may include cost-sharing for clinical 
        preventive services and prenatal care.
            (5) Cost-sharing rules.--Cost-sharing schedules established 
        by the Board may include copayments, coinsurance, deductibles, 
        and out-of-pocket limits. The copayments, coinsurance, 
        deductibles and out-of-pocket limits on cost-sharing for a year 
        under the schedules shall be applied based upon expenses 
        incurred for covered items and services furnished in the year.
            (6) Lifetime limits.--No cost-sharing schedule established 
        by the Board may include lifetime limits.
    (d) Legislative Proposals on Actuarial Equivalence and Health 
Service Categories.--
            (1) In general.--The Board may develop legislative 
        proposals for modifications to the actuarial equivalence 
        provisions of section 1201 and the categories of health care 
        items and services under section 1202.
            (2) Implementing bill.--The Board shall submit to the 
        Congress an implementing bill which contains such statutory 
        provisions as are necessary or appropriate to implement the 
        legislative proposals developed under paragraph (1).
    (e) Reports.--
            (1) Dental care.--The Board shall undertake a study to 
        determine the costs of providing--
                    (A) preventive dental care to all adults;
                    (B) restorative dental care to all adults; and
                    (C) preventive dental care to adults with 
                developmental, cognitive, and other mental 
                disabilities.
        Not later than July 1, 1996, the Board shall prepare and submit 
        to the Secretary and the Congress, a report concerning such 
        study.
            (2) In vitro fertilization.--The Board shall undertake a 
        study to determine the costs of providing coverage for in vitro 
        fertilization in the standard benefits package. Not later than 
        July 1, 1996, the Board shall prepare and submit to the 
        Secretary and the Congress, a report concerning such study.
    (f) Other Requirements.--The Board shall satisfy any other 
requirements imposed on the Board under this title.

SEC. 1214. POWERS.

    (a) Executive Director; Staff.--
            (1) Executive director.--
                    (A) In general.--The Board shall, without regard to 
                section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint 
                an Executive Director.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director shall be paid at a 
                rate equivalent to a rate for the Senior Executive 
                Service.
            (2) Staff.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
                (C), the Executive Director, with the approval of the 
                Board, may appoint and fix the pay of additional 
                personnel.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director may make such 
                appointments without regard to the provisions of title 
                5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
                competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may 
                be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 
                and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, 
                relating to classification and General Schedule pay 
                rates, except that an individual so appointed may not 
                receive pay in excess of 120 percent of the annual rate 
                of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
                    (C) Detailed personnel.--Upon request of the 
                Executive Director, the head of any Federal department 
                or agency may detail any of the personnel of that 
                department or agency to the Board to assist the Board 
                in carrying out its duties under this Act.
    (b) Contract Authority.--To the extent provided in advance in 
appropriations Acts, the Board may contract with any person (including 
an agency of the Federal Government) for studies and analysis as 
required to execute its functions. Any employee of the Executive Branch 
may be detailed to the Board to assist the Board in carrying out its 
duties.
    (c) Consultations with Experts.--The Board may consult with any 
outside expert individuals or groups that the Board determines 
appropriate in performing its duties under section 1213. The Board may 
establish advisory committees.
    (d) Access to Information.--The Board may secure directly from any 
department or agency of the United States information necessary to 
enable it to carry out its functions, to the extent such information is 
otherwise available to a department or agency of the United States. 
Upon request of the chair, the head of that department or agency shall 
furnish that information to the Board.
    (e) Delegation of Authority.--Except as otherwise provided, the 
Board may delegate any function to such officers and employees as the 
Board may designate and may authorize such successive redelegations of 
such functions with the Board as the Board deems to be necessary or 
appropriate. No delegation of functions by the Board shall relieve the 
Board of responsibility for the administration of such functions.
    (f) Rulemaking.--The Board is authorized to establish such rules as 
may be necessary to carry out this subtitle.

SEC. 1215. FUNDING.

    (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Board $5,000,000 for each year and such additional 
sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this part.
    (b) Submission of Budget.--Under the procedures of chapter 11 of 
title 31, United States Code, the budget for the Board for a fiscal 
year shall be reviewed by the Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget and submitted to the Congress as part of the President's 
submission of the Budget of the United States for the fiscal year.

SEC. 1216. APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.

    The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply 
to the Board.

SEC. 1217. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF BOARD PROPOSALS.

    (a) In General.--Any implementing bill described in section 1213 
shall be considered by Congress under the procedures for consideration 
described in subsection (b).
    (b) Congressional Consideration.--
            (1) Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This 
        subsection is enacted by Congress--
                    (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the 
                House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, 
                and as such is deemed a part of the rules of each 
                House, respectively, but applicable only with respect 
                to the procedure to be followed in that House in the 
                case of an implementing bill described in subsection 
                (a), and supersedes other rules only to the extent that 
                such rules are inconsistent therewith; and
                    (B) with full recognition of the constitutional 
                right of either House to change the rules (so far as 
                relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, 
                in the same manner and to the same extent as in the 
                case of any other rule of that House.
            (2) Introduction and referral.--On the day on which the 
        implementing bill described in subsection (a) is transmitted to 
        the House of Representatives and the Senate, such bill shall be 
        introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the 
        Majority Leader of the House, for himself or herself and the 
        Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the House 
        designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the 
        House and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the 
        Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself or herself and the 
        Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate 
        designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the 
        Senate. If either House is not in session on the day on which 
        the implementing bill is transmitted, the bill shall be 
        introduced in the House, as provided in the preceding sentence, 
        on the first day thereafter on which the House is in session. 
        The implementing bill introduced in the House of 
        Representatives and the Senate shall be referred to the 
        appropriate committees of each House.
            (3) Amendments prohibited.--No amendment to an implementing 
        bill shall be in order in either the House of Representatives 
        or the Senate and no motion to suspend the application of this 
        subsection shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be 
        in order in either House for the Presiding Officer to entertain 
        a request to suspend the application of this subsection by 
        unanimous consent.
            (4) Period for committee and floor consideration.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
                (B), if the committee or committees of either House to 
                which an implementing bill has been referred have not 
                reported it at the close of the 45th day after its 
                introduction, such committee or committees shall be 
                automatically discharged from further consideration of 
                the implementing bill and it shall be placed on the 
                appropriate calendar. A vote on final passage of the 
                implementing bill shall be taken in each House on or 
                before the close of the 45th day after the implementing 
                bill is reported by the committees or committee of that 
                House to which it was referred, or after such committee 
                or committees have been discharged from further 
                consideration of the implementing bill. If prior to the 
                passage by one House of an implementing bill of that 
                House, that House receives the same implementing bill 
                from the other House then--
                            (i) the procedure in that House shall be 
                        the same as if no implementing bill had been 
                        received from the other House; but
                            (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on 
                        the implementing bill of the other House.
                    (B) Computation of days.--For purposes of 
                subparagraph (A), in computing a number of days in 
                either House, there shall be excluded--
                            (i) the days on which either House is not 
                        in session because of an adjournment of more 
                        than 3 days to a day certain, or an adjournment 
                        of the Congress sine die; and
                            (ii) any Saturday and Sunday not excluded 
                        under clause (i) when either House is not in 
                        session.
            (5) Floor consideration in the house of representatives.--
                    (A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the House of 
                Representatives to proceed to the consideration of an 
                implementing bill shall be highly privileged and not 
                debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in 
                order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider 
                the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed 
                to.
                    (B) Debate.--Debate in the House of Representatives 
                on an implementing bill shall be limited to not more 
                than 20 hours, which shall be divided equally between 
                those favoring and those opposing the bill. A motion 
                further to limit debate shall not be debatable. It 
                shall not be in order to move to recommit an 
                implementing bill or to move to reconsider the vote by 
                which an implementing bill is agreed to or disagreed 
                to.
                    (C) Motion to postpone.--Motions to postpone, made 
                in the House of Representatives with respect to the 
                consideration of an implementing bill, and motions to 
                proceed to the consideration of other business, shall 
                be decided without debate.
                    (D) Appeals.--All appeals from the decisions of the 
                Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the 
                House of Representatives to the procedure relating to 
                an implementing bill shall be decided without debate.
                    (E) General rules apply.--Except to the extent 
                specifically provided in the preceding provisions of 
                this paragraph, consideration of an implementing bill 
                shall be governed by the Rules of the House of 
                Representatives applicable to other bills and 
                resolutions in similar circumstances.
            (6) Floor consideration in the senate.--
                    (A) Motion to proceed.--A motion in the Senate to 
                proceed to the consideration of an implementing bill 
                shall be privileged and not debatable. An amendment to 
                the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in 
                order to move to reconsider the vote by which the 
                motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
                    (B) General debate.--Debate in the Senate on an 
                implementing bill, and all debatable motions and 
                appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to 
                not more than 20 hours. The time shall be equally 
                divided between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader 
                and the Minority Leader or their designees.
                    (C) Debate of motions and appeals.--Debate in the 
                Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection 
                with an implementing bill shall be limited to not more 
                than one hour, to be equally divided between, and 
                controlled by, the mover and the manager of the 
                implementing bill, except that in the event the manager 
                of the implementing bill is in favor of any such motion 
                or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be 
                controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee. Such 
                leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their 
                control on the passage of an implementing bill, allot 
                additional time to any Senator during the consideration 
                of any debatable motion or appeal.
                    (D) Other motions.--A motion in the Senate to 
                further limit debate is not debatable. A motion to 
                recommit an implementing bill is not in order.

                   Subtitle D--Access to Health Plans

                    PART 1--ACCESS THROUGH EMPLOYERS

SEC. 1301. GENERAL EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES.

    (a) Offer of Plans.--
            (1) In general.--Each employer--
                    (A) shall make available to each employee of the 
                employer the opportunity--
                            (i) in the case of an experienced-rated 
                        employer, to enroll through the employer in one 
                        of at least 3 certified experience-rated 
                        standard health plans which provide the 
                        standard benefits package established under 
                        subtitle C, including, if available, a high 
                        cost-sharing plan, a combination cost-sharing 
                        plan, and a low cost-sharing plan as 
                        established under such subtitle; or
                            (ii) in the case of a community-rated 
                        employer--
                                    (I) to enroll in any community-
                                rated plan offered through a purchasing 
                                cooperative operating in the community 
                                rating area in which such employer is 
                                located, and if such cooperative is not 
                                a purchasing cooperative described in 
                                section 1341, then also through a 
                                cooperative so described; and
                                    (II) at the option of the employer, 
                                to enroll through the employer in one 
                                of at least 3 certified community-rated 
                                standard health plans which provide the 
                                standard benefits package established 
                                under subtitle C, including, if 
                                available, a high cost-sharing plan, a 
                                combination cost-sharing plan, and a 
                                low cost-sharing plan as established 
                                under such subtitle; and
                    (B) shall provide, upon request, payroll 
                withholding of the employee's premiums.
            (2) Waiver of requirement.--The Governor of a participating 
        State (or, the Secretary of Labor, in the case of sponsors of 
        multistate self-insured health plans) may waive the requirement 
        under paragraph (1) for any employer in a rural area of such 
        State which demonstrates an insufficient population density to 
        support 3 types of certified standard health plans. Such an 
        employer shall at least offer a high cost-sharing plan as 
        established under subtitle C.
            (3) Prohibition on offering of alternative package.--No 
        employer may offer an alternative standard benefits package 
        established under subtitle C.
    (b) Forwarding of Information.--
            (1) Information regarding plans.--An employer must provide 
        each employee of such employer--
                    (A) with information provided by the State under 
                section 1508 regarding all certified standard health 
                plans offered in the community rating area in which the 
                employer is located, and
                    (B) if the employer knows that an employee resides 
                in another community rating area, information regarding 
                how to obtain information on certified standard health 
                plans offered to residents of such other community 
                rating area.
            (2) Information regarding employees.--An employer shall 
        forward the name and address (and any other necessary 
        identifying information specified by the Secretary) of each 
        employee enrolling through the employer--
                    (A) to the certified standard health plan in which 
                such employee is enrolling, or
                    (B) to the purchasing cooperative (if any) through 
                which such employee is enrolling.

SEC. 1302. AUDITING OF RECORDS.

    Each employer shall maintain such records, and provide the 
participating State for the area in which the employer maintains its 
principal place of employment (as specified by the Secretary of Labor) 
with access to such records, as may be necessary to verify and audit 
the information reported under this Act.

SEC. 1303. PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN EMPLOYER DISCRIMINATION.

    (a) In General.--No employer may discriminate with respect to an 
employee on the basis of the family status of the employee or on the 
basis of the class of family enrollment selected with respect to the 
employee.
    (b) Other Prohibitions.--For the prohibition of other employer 
discriminatory practices, see section 4522 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986.

SEC. 1304. PROHIBITION ON SELF-INSURING COST-SHARING BENEFITS.

    A community-rated employer (and an experience-rated employer with 
respect to employees who are community-rated eligible individuals) may 
provide benefits to employees that consist of the benefits included in 
a cost-sharing plan (as defined in section 1141(a)(2)(C)) only through 
a contribution toward the purchase of a cost-sharing plan which is 
funded primarily through insurance.

SEC. 1305. RESPONSIBILITIES IN SINGLE-PAYER STATES.

    In the case of an individual who resides in a single-payer State 
and an employer with respect to employees who reside in such a State, 
the responsibilities of such individual and employer under such system 
shall supersede the obligations of the individual and employer under 
this subtitle.

SEC. 1306. DEVELOPMENT OF LARGE EMPLOYER PURCHASING GROUPS.

    (a) In General.--Nothing in this title shall be construed as 
prohibiting 2 or more experience-rated employers from joining together 
to purchase insurance for their employees, except that each such 
employer shall be responsible for meeting the employer's requirements 
under this title with respect to its employees.
    (b) Rules by Secretary.--The Secretary of Labor shall provide rules 
for large employer purchasing groups similar to the rules applicable to 
purchasing cooperatives, including rules regarding fiduciary 
responsibilities and financial management.
    (c) No Use of Purchasing Cooperatives.--An experience-rated 
employer shall be ineligible to purchase health insurance through a 
purchasing cooperative, except with respect to health insurance for 
individuals described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1307(d).

SEC. 1307. RULES GOVERNING LITIGATION INVOLVING RETIREE HEALTH 
              BENEFITS.

    (a) Maintenance of Benefits.--
            (1) In general.--If--
                    (A) retiree health benefits or plan or plan sponsor 
                payments in connection with such benefits are to be or 
                have been terminated or reduced under an employee 
                welfare benefit plan; and
                    (B) an action is brought by any participant or 
                beneficiary to enjoin or otherwise modify such 
                termination or reduction,
        the court without requirement of any additional showing shall 
        promptly order the plan and plan sponsor to maintain the 
        retiree health benefits and payments at the level in effect 
        immediately before the termination or reduction while the 
        action is pending in any court. No security or other 
        undertaking shall be required of any participant or beneficiary 
        as a condition for issuance of such relief. An order requiring 
        such maintenance of benefits may be refused or dissolved only 
        upon determination by the court, on the basis of clear and 
        convincing evidence, that the action is clearly without merit.
            (2) Modifications.--Nothing in this section shall preclude 
        a court from modifying the obligation of a plan or plan sponsor 
        to the extent retiree benefits are otherwise being paid.
    (b) Burden of Proof.--In addition to the relief authorized in 
subsection (a) or otherwise available, if, in any action described in 
subsection (a), the terms of the employee welfare benefit plan summary 
plan description or other materials distributed to employees at the 
time of a participant's retirement or disability are silent or are 
ambiguous, either on their face or after consideration of extrinsic 
evidence, as to whether retiree health benefits and payments may be 
terminated or reduced for a participant and his or her beneficiaries 
after the participant's retirement or disability, then the benefits and 
payments shall not be terminated or reduced for the participant and his 
or her beneficiaries unless the plan or plan sponsor establishes by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the summary plan description and 
other materials about retiree benefits--
            (1) were distributed to the participant at least 90 days in 
        advance of retirement or disability;
            (2) did not promise retiree health benefits for the 
        lifetime of the participant and his or her spouse; and
            (3) clearly and specifically disclosed that the plan 
        allowed such termination or reduction as to the participant 
        after the time of his or her retirement or disability.
The disclosure described in paragraph (3) must have been made 
prominently and in language which can be understood by the average plan 
participant.
    (c) Representation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an 
employee representative of any retired employee or the employee's 
spouse or dependents may--
            (1) bring an action described in this section on behalf of 
        such employee, spouse, or dependents; or
            (2) appear in such an action on behalf of such employee, 
        spouse or dependents.
    (d) Retiree Health Benefits.--For the purposes of this section, the 
term ``retiree health benefits'' means health benefits (including 
coverage) which are provided to--
            (1) retired or disabled employees who, immediately before 
        the termination or reduction, are entitled to receive such 
        benefits upon retirement or becoming disabled; and
            (2) their spouses and dependents.
    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to actions relating to terminations or reductions of retiree 
health benefits which are pending or brought, on or after July 20, 
1993.

SEC. 1308. ENFORCEMENT.

    In the case of a person that violates a requirement of this 
subtitle, the Secretary of Labor may impose a civil money penalty, in 
an amount not to exceed $10,000, for each violation with respect to 
each individual.

    PART 2--ACCESS THROUGH HEALTH INSURANCE PURCHASING COOPERATIVES

                    Subpart A--General Requirements

SEC. 1321. ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION.

    (a) Designation of Cooperatives.--A State shall certify health 
insurance purchasing cooperatives (in this Act referred to as 
``purchasing cooperatives'') in accordance with this part. Each 
cooperative shall be chartered under State law and operated as a not-
for-profit corporation.
    (b) Board of Directors.--
            (1) In general.--Each cooperative shall be governed by a 
        Board of Directors to be composed of representatives of 
        community-rated employers, community-rated employees, and 
        community-rated individuals as elected by the members of the 
        purchasing cooperative.
            (2) Initial board.--The initial Board of Directors of a 
        purchasing cooperative shall be composed of members selected by 
        the sponsoring entity of the cooperative. Subsequent members of 
        the Board of Directors shall be elected as provided for under 
        paragraph (1) after being nominated by a nominating committee 
        appointed by the preceding Board of Directors.
    (c) Establishment by State or Local Government.--A State or local 
government may establish or sponsor a purchasing cooperative to serve a 
community rating area. The Secretary shall establish special rules 
concerning the legal and governing structure of a State or local 
government purchasing cooperative.
    (d) Membership.--A purchasing cooperative shall accept all 
community-rated employers, community-rated employees, and community-
rated individuals residing within the area served by the cooperative as 
members if such employers, employees, or individuals request such 
membership. Members of a cooperative shall have voting rights to select 
members of the Board of Directors consistent with rules established by 
the State.
    (e) Prohibition.--An insurer may not form or underwrite a 
purchasing cooperative but may administer such a cooperative.
    (f) Duties of Cooperatives.--Each purchasing cooperative shall--
            (1) negotiate (regarding premiums and marketing fees) with 
        and enter into agreements with standard health plans under 
        section 1323;
            (2) enter into agreements with community-rated employers;
            (3) enroll community-rated employees and community-rated 
        individuals in standard health plans;
            (4) collect premiums and make payments to standard health 
        plans on behalf of community-rated employers and community-
        rated individuals;
            (5) provide for coordination with other purchasing 
        cooperatives;
            (6) provide comparative information to the public and the 
        participating State on standard health plans offered through 
        the purchasing cooperative from information provided by the 
        plans under section 1125;
            (7) have the capability of accepting data from standard 
        health plans as required under subtitle B of title V;
            (8) comply with such fiduciary responsibility, financial 
        management, and administrative requirements as the Secretary 
        may establish; and
            (9) carry out other functions provided for under this 
        title.
    (g) Limitation on Activities.--A cooperative shall not--
            (1) perform any activity (including review, approval, or 
        enforcement) relating to payment rates for providers;
            (2) perform any activity (including certification or 
        enforcement) relating to compliance of standard health plans 
        with the requirements of this Act;
            (3) assume insurance risk; or
            (4) perform other activities identified by the State as 
        being inconsistent with the performance of its duties under 
        this Act.
    (h) Rules of Construction.--
            (1) Multiple cooperatives.--Noting in this section shall be 
        construed to prevent a State from certifying or establishing 
        more than one purchasing cooperative in a community rating 
        area.
            (2) Exclusive cooperative.--
                    (A) In general.--Nothing in this section shall be 
                construed as requiring a State to certify or establish 
                more than one purchasing cooperative serving a 
                community rating area.
                    (B) Special rules.--If a State chooses to certify 
                only one purchasing cooperative in a community rating 
                area, then such cooperative (other than a cooperative 
                established under section 1341) may not negotiate 
                regarding premiums as described in subsection (f)(1) 
                and, notwithstanding section 1323(a)(1), shall enter 
                into an agreement with each standard health plan 
                operating in the area which desires such an agreement.
            (3) Single organization serving multiple community rating 
        areas.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
        preventing a single not-for-profit corporation from being the 
        purchasing cooperative for more than one community rating area.
            (4) Voluntary participation.--Nothing in this section shall 
        be construed as requiring any community-rated individual, 
        community-rated employee, or community-rated employer to 
        purchase a standard health plan exclusively through a 
        cooperative.

SEC. 1322. MEMBERSHIP.

    (a) In General.--A purchasing cooperative shall offer all 
community-rated individuals and community-rated employees residing 
within the community rating area served by the cooperative the 
opportunity to enroll in any standard health plan that has entered into 
an agreement with the cooperative under section 1323.
    (b) Enrollment Process.--A purchasing cooperative shall establish 
an enrollment process in accordance with rules established by the 
Secretary.
    (c) Coordination Among Purchasing Cooperatives.--Each participating 
State shall establish rules consistent with this section for 
coordination among purchasing cooperatives in cases in which community-
rated employers are located in one community rating area and their 
community-rated employees reside in a different community rating area.

SEC. 1323. AGREEMENTS WITH STANDARD HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) Agreements.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each 
        purchasing cooperative for a community rating area may enter 
        into an agreement under this section with any standard health 
        plan that the purchasing cooperative desires to be made 
        available through such purchasing cooperative.
            (2) Minimum requirement.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
                (B), each purchasing cooperative shall enter into an 
                agreement under paragraph (1) with at least 3 types of 
                standard health plans which provide the standard 
                benefits package established under subtitle C, 
                including, if available, a high cost-sharing plan, a 
                combination cost-sharing plan, and a low cost-sharing 
                plan as established under such subtitle.
                    (B) Waiver of requirement.--The Governor of a 
                participating State may waive the requirement under 
                subparagraph (A), in a manner consistent with section 
                1301(a)(2)), for any purchasing cooperative in a rural 
                area of such State which demonstrates an insufficient 
                population density to support 3 types of standard 
                health plans. Such a purchasing cooperative shall at 
                least offer a high cost-sharing plan as established 
                under such subtitle.
            (3) Limitation.--A purchasing cooperative may not enter 
        into an agreement under this section with a standard health 
        plan unless such plan is certified by the State under subtitle 
        E.
            (4) Termination of agreement.--An agreement under paragraph 
        (1) shall remain in effect for a 12-month period. The State 
        shall establish a process for the termination of agreements 
        entered into under this section and a process for appealing 
        such termination under this paragraph. In accordance with rules 
        established by the State--
                    (A) a cooperative may terminate an agreement with a 
                standard health plan if the health plan's certification 
                for the community rating area involved is terminated or 
                if the health plan fails to fulfill the requirements of 
                the agreement; and
                    (B) a standard health plan may appeal the 
                termination of an agreement with a cooperative under 
                this paragraph to the State in accordance with rules 
                and procedures established by the State.
    (b) Receipt of Gross Premiums.--
            (1) In general.--A purchasing cooperative may require that 
        a standard health plan with which such cooperative has an 
        agreement under this section provide for the payment of 
        premiums directly to the cooperative in accordance with rules 
        promulgated by the Secretary.
            (2) Forwarding of premiums.--A purchasing cooperative that 
        requires direct payment of premiums under paragraph (1) shall 
        forward to the standard health plan the amounts collected on 
        the behalf of the enrollees in such plan in accordance with the 
        State program of reinsurance and risk adjustment.
            (3) Certified standard health plans retain risk of 
        nonpayment.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as 
        placing upon a purchasing cooperative any risk associated with 
        the failure of individuals and employers to make prompt payment 
        of premiums (other than the portion of the premium representing 
        the purchasing cooperative administrative fee under section 
        1324(a)).

SEC. 1324. MEMBERSHIP AND MARKETING FEES.

    (a) Cooperative Fees.--A purchasing cooperative shall charge 
members a uniform membership fee to cover the cost of activities 
undertaken by the cooperative (including all administrative costs 
incurred by the cooperative).
    (b) Marketing Fees.--
            (1) In general.--A purchasing cooperative shall charge 
        members a separate marketing fee which a standard health plan 
        may charge to cover the cost of marketing and administrative 
        activities undertaken by such plan in such cooperative.
            (2) Negotiation.--A purchasing cooperative and a standard 
        health plan shall negotiate the marketing fee. Such negotiated 
        fee shall not be binding on such health plan with respect to 
        other purchasing cooperatives through which the plan is 
        offered.
            (3) Limitation.--In no case shall a marketing fee assessed 
        by a standard health plan offered outside of a purchasing 
        cooperative be lower than the weighted average of the marketing 
        fees negotiated with all purchasing cooperatives for the 
        community rating area involved.
    (c) Disclosure and Multiple Cooperatives.--
            (1) Disclosure.--A purchasing cooperative shall, prior to 
        the time of enrollment, publish the membership fee of such 
        cooperative and the marketing fees for each standard health 
        plan offered through the cooperative. Such fees shall be 
        calculated and identified as separate charges from the premium 
        charged by the standard health plans offered by the purchasing 
        cooperative.
            (2) Submissions to state.--
                    (A) In general.--Each purchasing cooperative in a 
                community rating area shall provide the State with 
                information on the fees described in paragraph (1) 
                under rules developed by the State.
                    (B) Documentation.--Pursuant to regulations issued 
                by the Secretary, standard health plans shall submit 
                actuarial data and such other documentation as the 
                State may require in order to verify the basis for 
                variation in marketing fees across cooperatives and 
                other insurance distribution sources. States shall use 
                such information in order to make a determination that 
                each plan's marketing fees are based on legitimate 
                variation in marketing and distribution costs across 
                alternative distribution sources.
            (3) Multiple cooperatives.--In community rating areas in 
        which States have certified multiple purchasing cooperatives, 
        such cooperatives may compete for members on the basis of the 
        fees described in this section.

                  Subpart B--Community-Rated Employers

SEC. 1331. DUTIES OF PURCHASING COOPERATIVES.

    (a) In General.--A purchasing cooperative for a community rating 
area shall offer to enter into an agreement under this section with 
each community-rated employer that employs individuals in the community 
rating area and that desires to join the cooperative. An agreement 
between such an employer and a cooperative shall include provisions 
consistent with the requirements of this subtitle.
    (b) Election of Enrollment.--
            (1) In general.--An employee of a community-rated employer 
        may select coverage under any of the standard health plans 
        offered through a purchasing cooperative of which the employer 
        is a member.
            (2) Enrollment outside the cooperative.--An employee of a 
        community-rated employer may elect to enroll in a plan offered 
        through the purchasing cooperative with which the employer has 
        entered into an agreement or directly with a standard health 
        plan selected by the employer (if such plan is not offered by 
        the cooperative selected by the employer). A community-rated 
        employee not residing in the community rating area served by 
        the purchasing cooperative selected by the employer shall 
        enroll in a standard health plan consistent with rules 
        promulgated by the Secretary. The purchasing cooperative 
        selected by the employer shall be responsible for forwarding 
        premium payments to the appropriate plan or cooperative for 
        each community-rated employee in accordance with the State 
        program of reinsurance and risk adjustment.
            (3) Voluntary employer contribution.--If an employer 
        voluntarily contributes to the cost of health insurance 
        coverage for its employees, the employer shall not be required 
        to make a contibution on behalf of an employee who elects to 
        obtain coverage directly from a standard health plan not chosen 
        by such employer or from a purchasing cooperative not chosen by 
        such employer, unless such cooperative is one established under 
        section 1341.
    (c) Forwarding Information on Eligible Employees.--Under an 
agreement between an employer and a cooperative, the employer must 
forward to the appropriate cooperative such information as may be 
required by the Secretary.

          Subpart C--Federal Employees Health Benefits Program

SEC. 1341. REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO FEHBP.

    (a) Availability of Plans.--
            (1) Community-rated individuals.--All standard health plans 
        offered by FEHBP through a purchasing cooperative joined or 
        established by FEHBP in a community rating area under 
        subsection (b) shall be made available to all community-rated 
        individuals residing within that area at the community-rated 
        premium established under section 1116.
            (2) Federal employees and annuitants.--Until the date of 
        universal coverage, any Federal employee or annuitant shall 
        obtain coverage under any FEHBP plan offered through such a 
        purchasing cooperative in the community rating area in which 
        such employee or annuitant resides at the rate established 
        under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for such plan.
            (3) Offer of national plans.--Each purchasing cooperative 
        joined or established under paragraph (1) shall, not later than 
        January 1, 1998, offer to community-rated individuals covered 
        by such cooperative all national FEHBP plans (including 
        employee organization plans) under rules established by the 
        Office of Personnel Management.
    (b) Agreements With Purchasing Cooperatives.--
            (1) In general.--The Office of Personnel Management shall 
        make every effort to enter into an agreement with a purchasing 
        cooperative in each community rating area in the United States 
        to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
            (2) Establishment by opm.--If no purchasing cooperative 
        exists in an area or if the Office of Personnel Management is 
        unsuccessful in reaching such an agreement, the Office of 
        Personnel Management shall establish and administer a 
        purchasing cooperative in such area. Such cooperative shall 
        meet all the requirements of this part except rules regarding 
        governance and fiduciary responsibility.
            (3) Designation as purchasing cooperative.--All FEHBP 
        eligible employees residing in the community rating area served 
        by a cooperative described in paragraph 1 or (2) shall enroll 
        in a standard health plan through such cooperative.
    (c) Requirement of OPM.--
            (1) In general.--The Office of Personnel Management is 
        hereby authorized to take such actions as are appropriate to 
        fulfill its responsibilities under this subpart.
            (2) Rate blending.--The Office of Personnel Management 
        shall implement rules to blend during the period before the 
        date of universal coverage the premiums for FEHBP plans offered 
        through purchasing cooperatives to Federal employees and 
        community-rated individuals in each community rating area.
    (d) Amendments to Title 5.--
            (1) In general.--Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, 
        is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 8915. Relationship to the Health Security Act
    ``(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the 
provisions of the Health Security Act, to the extent of any 
inconsistency between such provisions.
    ``(b) Individuals who are not Federal employees or annuitants and 
who are enrolled in a health benefits plan pursuant to section 1341 of 
the Health Security Act shall for all administrative purposes be 
treated separately from Federal employees and annuitants enrolled under 
this chapter.
    ``(c) No provision of the Health Security Act shall be construed to 
authorize the payment or deposit of any monies from or into the 
Employees Health Benefits Fund.''.
            (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 8914 of title 5, United 
        States Code, is amended by striking out ``Any provision of 
        law'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Except for the provisions 
        of the Health Security Act, any provision of law''.
            (3) Technical amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 
        89 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding after 
        the item relating to section 8914 the following new item:

``8915. Relationship to the Health Security Act.''.

SEC. 1342. SPECIAL RULES FOR FEHBP SUPPLEMENTAL PLANS.

    (a) Development.--The Office of Personnel Management shall develop 
FEHBP supplemental health benefit plans. The Office of Personnel 
Management shall meet and confer with representatives of Federal 
employees and annuitants regarding the supplemental services plans and 
the cost-sharing plans to be offered (including premium contributions, 
if any, to be made by the Federal Government with respect to such plans 
for Federal employees and annuitants) through a process to be 
established by the National Partnership Council.
    (b) Offering.--The Federal Government shall offer FEHBP 
supplemental health benefit plans developed in accordance with 
subsection (a) and cost-sharing plans as provided in section 1141 to 
Federal employees, annuitants, and any other community-rated 
individual.

SEC. 1343. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this subpart:
            (1) Annuitant.--The term ``annuitant'' means an 
        ``annuitant'' as defined by section 8901 of title 5, United 
        States Code.
            (2) FEHBP.--The term ``FEHBP'' means the health insurance 
        program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code.
            (3) Federal employee.--The term ``Federal employee'' means 
        an ``employee'' as defined by section 8901 of title 5, United 
        States Code.

                 PART 3--TREATMENT OF ASSOCIATION PLANS

SEC. 1351. RULES RELATING TO MULTIPLE EMPLOYER WELFARE ARRANGEMENTS.

    (a) General Rule.--A multiple employer welfare arrangement--
            (1) shall meet all requirements of this Act applicable to 
        standard health plans, and
            (2) may elect to be treated as a health insurance 
        purchasing cooperative if it meets the requirements of part 2 
        and other applicable requirements of this Act.
    (b) Treatment for Rating Purpose.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a 
        plan to which subsection (a) applies shall be treated as a 
        community-rated plan and shall meet all requirements of this 
        Act applicable to a community-rated plan.
            (2) Experience-rated plan.--A plan shall be treated as an 
        experience-rated plan only if the only participants in the plan 
        are experience-rated individuals.
    (c) Coordination With ERISA.--Section 514(b) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended 
by striking paragraph (6).
    (d) Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangement.--For purposes of this 
section, the term ``multiple employer welfare arrangement'' has the 
meaning given such term by section 3(40) of the Employer Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974.

SEC. 1352. ASSOCIATION PLANS.

    (a) General Rule.--Any health plan to which section 1351 does not 
apply which is maintained by an association or similar entity shall 
meet all requirements of this Act applicable to standard health plans.
    (b) Treatment for Rating Purposes.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a 
        plan to which subsection (a) applies shall be treated as a 
        community-rated plan and shall meet all requirements of this 
        Act applicable to a community-rated plan.
            (2) Experience-rated plan.--A plan shall be treated as an 
        experience-rated plan only if the only participants in the plan 
        are experience-rated individuals.

                  Subtitle E--Federal Responsibilities

             PART 1--SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

                       Subpart A--General Duties

SEC. 1401. GENERAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

    (a) In General.--Except as otherwise specifically provided in this 
Act (or with respect to the administration of provisions in the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or in the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
administer and implement all of the provisions of this Act.
    (b) Coverage and Families.--The Secretary shall develop and 
implement standards relating to the eligibility of individuals for 
coverage in applicable health plans under subtitle B and may provide 
such additional exceptions and special rules relating to the treatment 
of family members under section 1113 as the Secretary finds 
appropriate.
    (c) Quality Management and Improvement.--The Secretary shall 
establish and have ultimate responsibility for a performance-based 
system of quality management and improvement as required by section 
5001.
    (d) Information System and Information Related Functions.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall--
                    (A) develop and implement standards to establish a 
                national health information system to measure quality 
                as required by title V;
                    (B) provide model format and content requirements 
                for summary plan descriptions;
                    (C) provide model format and content requirements 
                for comparative plan brochures under section 1125; and
                    (D) provide model format and content requirements 
                for comparative purchasing cooperative brochures under 
                section 1321.
            (2) Information related functions.--
                    (A) Designation.--The Secretary shall provide for 
                the use of entities in the national health data network 
                to perform information related functions under this 
                section with respect to employers, States, contracting 
                entities, and purchasing cooperatives.
                    (B) Functions.--The functions referred to in 
                subparagraph (A) shall include--
                            (i) receipt of information submitted by 
                        employers under section 1301,
                            (ii) with respect to the information 
                        received, transmittal to the States, and
                            (iii) such other functions as the Secretary 
                        specifies.
    (e) Participating State Requirements.--Consistent with the 
provisions of subtitle F, the Secretary shall--
            (1) establish requirements for participating States,
            (2) monitor State compliance with those requirements, and
            (3) provide technical assistance,
in a manner that ensures access to the standard benefit package for all 
eligible individuals.
    (f) Development of Premium and Age Class Factors.--The Secretary 
shall establish premium class and age class factors under subpart D.
    (g) Development of Reinsurance and Risk-Adjustment Methodology.--
The Secretary shall develop a methodology for the reinsurance and risk-
adjustment of premium payments to community-rated and experience-rated 
health plans in accordance with section 1504.
    (h) Financial Requirements.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish minimum 
        capital requirements and requirements for guaranty funds and 
        financial reporting and auditing standards under subpart F.
            (2) Financial management standards.--The Secretary, in 
        consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall establish, for 
        purposes of section 1118, standards relating to the management 
        of finances, maintenance of records, accounting practices, 
        auditing procedures, and financial reporting for States, 
        consumer purchasing cooperatives and health plans. Such 
        standards shall take into account current Federal laws and 
        regulations relating to fiduciary responsibilities and 
        financial management of funds.
            (3) Auditing state performance.--The Secretary shall 
        perform periodic financial and other audits of States to assure 
        that such States are carrying out their responsibilities under 
        this Act consistent with this Act. Such audits shall include 
        audits of State performance in the areas of--
                    (A) assuring enrollment of all community-rated 
                individuals in health plans;
                    (B) management of premium and cost sharing 
                discounts and reductions provided;
                    (C) financial management (including the financial 
                activities of cooperatives and State-designated 
                contracting entities); and
                    (D) assuring enforcement of the antidiscrimination 
                provisions of this Act.
    (i) Standards for Health Plan Grievance Procedures.--The Secretary 
shall establish standards for health plan grievance procedures that are 
used by enrollees in pursuing complaints.
    (j) Fiduciary Requirements.--The Secretary shall, in consultation 
with the Secretary of Labor, develop and promulgate fiduciary 
requirements for the management of funds by States, plans, 
cooperatives, and employers.
    (k) Guaranty Funds.--The Secretary shall establish standards for 
guaranty funds as provided for in section 1442.
    (l) Standards for Utilization Management Programs.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with 
        interested parties which may include one or more accrediting 
        organizations, shall promulgate uniform Federal standards for 
        utilization management programs, to include the activities 
        described in section 1129.
            (2) Compliance.--States shall ensure compliance with the 
        Federal standards established under paragraph (1), consistent 
        with their role in certifying health plans.
            (3) Review and update.--The Secretary shall periodically 
        review and update utilization management standards to reflect 
        appropriate policies and practices in health care delivery.
    (m) Collection Activities.--The Secretary may provide (through 
contract or otherwise) for collection activities for the collection of 
amounts owed to States and purchasing cooperatives for health insurance 
coverage subject to the provisions of this title.

SEC. 1402. ANNUAL REPORT.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the National 
Health Benefits Board and the Health Care Cost and Coverage Commission, 
shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress an annual 
report concerning the overall implementation of the new health care 
system under this Act.
    (b) Matters To Be Included.--The Secretary shall include in each 
annual report under this section the following:
            (1) Information on Federal and State implementation.
            (2) Data related to quality improvement.
            (3) Recommendations or changes in the administration and 
        regulation of laws related to health care financing, delivery, 
        and coverage.

SEC. 1403. ASSISTANCE WITH FAMILY COLLECTIONS.

    The Secretary shall provide States with such technical and other 
assistance as may promote the efficient collection of other amounts 
owed by families under this Act.

SEC. 1404. ADVISORY OPINIONS.

    (a) In General.--Community- and provider-based plans, and 
individuals and organizations seeking to establish such plans, shall be 
eligible to receive advisory opinions from appropriate Federal 
entities, including opinions concerning whether their arrangement 
complies with Federal self-referral, fraud and abuse, and anti-trust 
laws.
    (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue regulations setting 
forth the procedures for obtaining advisory opinions described in 
subsection (a).
    (c) Timing of Opinions.--An advisory opinions shall be issued not 
later than 90 days after receipt of a request for such opinion from a 
plan.
    (d) Fees.--Applicants under this section shall pay a fee, the 
amount of which to be determined by the Secretary, to cover the costs 
of providing an opinion under this section.

SEC. 1405. FUNDING.

    There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this subpart for each of the fiscal 
years 1995 through 1999.

 Subpart B--Responsibilities Relating to Review and Approval of State 
                                Systems

SEC. 1411. FEDERAL REVIEW AND ACTION ON STATE SYSTEMS.

    (a) Approval of State Systems by Secretary.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall approve a State health 
        care system for which a plan is submitted under section 1501(a) 
        unless the Secretary determines that the system (as set forth 
        in the plan) does not (or will not) meet the responsibilities 
        for a participating State under this Act.
            (2) Regulations.--Not later than July 1, 1995, the 
        Secretary shall issue regulations, prescribing the requirements 
        for State health care systems under this title, except that in 
        the case of a plan submitted under section 1501(a) before the 
        date of issuance of such regulations, the Secretary shall take 
        action on such document notwithstanding the fact that such 
        regulations have not been issued.
            (3) No approval permitted for years prior to 1996.--Except 
        as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, the Secretary 
        may not approve a State health care system under this subpart 
        for any year prior to 1996.
    (b) Review of Completeness of Plans.--
            (1) In general.--If a State submits a plan under subsection 
        (a)(1), the Secretary shall notify the State, not later than 7 
        working days after the date of submission, whether or not the 
        plan is complete and provides the Secretary with sufficient 
        information to approve or disapprove the document.
            (2) Additional information on incomplete plan.--If the 
        Secretary notifies a State that the State's plan is not 
        complete, the State shall be provided such additional period 
        (not to exceed 45 days) as the Secretary may by regulation 
        establish in which to submit such additional information as the 
        Secretary may require. Not later than 7 working days after the 
        State submits the additional information, the Secretary shall 
        notify the State respecting the completeness of the plan.
    (c) Action on Completed Documents.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall make a determination 
        (and notify the State) on whether the State's plan provides for 
        the implementation of a State system that meets the applicable 
        requirements of this title--
                    (A) in the case of a State that did not require an 
                additional period described in subsection (b)(2) to 
                file a complete plan, not later than 90 days after 
                notifying a State under subsection (b) that the State's 
                plan is complete, or
                    (B) in the case of a State that required an 
                additional period described in subsection (b)(2) to 
                file a complete plan, not later than 90 days after 
                notifying a State under subsection (b) that the State's 
                plan is complete.
            (2) Review of coverage area.--The Secretary shall review 
        the State designation of community rating area boundaries to 
        determine whether such boundaries comply with sections 1502 and 
        1602, and in particular, the requirements of such sections 
        concerning non-discrimination in the establishment of coverage 
        area boundaries.
            (3) Plans deemed approved.--If the Secretary does not meet 
        the applicable deadline for making a determination and 
        providing notice under paragraph (1) with respect to a State's 
        plan, the Secretary shall be deemed to have approved the 
        State's plan for purposes of this Act.
    (d) Opportunity To Respond to Rejected Plan.--
            (1) In general.--If (within the applicable deadline under 
        subsection (c)(1)) the Secretary notifies a State that its plan 
        does not provide for the implementation of a State system that 
        meets the applicable requirements of this title, the Secretary 
        shall provide the State with a period of 60 days in which to 
        submit such additional information and assurances as the 
        Secretary may require.
            (2) Deadline for response.--Not later than 30 days after 
        receiving additional information and assurances under paragraph 
        (1), the Secretary shall make a determination (and notify the 
        State) on whether the State's plan provides for the 
        implementation of a State system that meets the applicable 
        requirements of this title.
            (3) Plan deemed approved.--If the Secretary does not meet 
        the deadline established under paragraph (2) with respect to a 
        State, the Secretary shall be deemed to have approved the 
        State's plan for purposes of this Act.
    (e) Approval of Previously Terminated States.--If the Secretary has 
approved a State system under this part for a year but subsequently 
terminated the approval of the system under section 1412(b)(2), the 
Secretary shall approve the system for a succeeding year if the State--
            (1) demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that 
        the failure that formed the basis for the termination no longer 
        exists, and
            (2) provides reasonable assurances that the types of 
        actions (or inactions) which formed the basis for such 
        termination will not recur.
    (f) Revisions to State System.--
            (1) Submission.--A State may revise a system approved for a 
        year under this section, except that such revision shall not 
        take effect unless the State has submitted to the Secretary a 
        document describing such revision and the Secretary has 
        approved such revision.
            (2) Actions on revisions.--Not later than 60 days after a 
        document is submitted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
        make a determination (and notify the State) on whether the 
        implementation of the State system, as proposed to be revised, 
        meets the applicable requirements of this title. If the 
        Secretary fails to meet the requirement of the preceding 
        sentence, the Secretary shall be deemed to have approved the 
        implementation of the State system as proposed to be revised.
            (3) Rejection of revisions.--Subsection (d) shall apply to 
        an amendment submitted under this subsection in the same manner 
        as it applies to a completed plan submitted under subsection 
        (b).

SEC. 1412. FAILURE OF PARTICIPATING STATES TO MEET CONDITIONS FOR 
              COMPLIANCE.

    (a) In General.--In the case of a participating State, if the 
Secretary determines that the operation of the State system under this 
title fails to meet the applicable requirements of this Act, the 
Secretary shall apply against the State in accordance with subsection 
(b).
    (b) Type of Sanction Applicable.--The sanctions applicable under 
this section are as follows:
            (1) If the Secretary determines that the State's failure 
        does not substantially jeopardize the ability of eligible 
        individuals in the State to obtain coverage for the standard 
        benefit package, the Secretary shall reduce payments with 
        respect to the State in accordance with section 1413.
            (2) If the Secretary determines that the failure 
        substantially jeopardizes the ability of eligible individuals 
        in the State to obtain coverage for the standard benefit 
        package--
                    (A) the Secretary shall terminate its approval of 
                the State system; and
                    (B) the Secretary shall assume the responsibilities 
                described in section 1422.
    (c) Termination of Sanction.--A State against which a sanction is 
imposed under this section may submit information at any time to the 
Secretary to demonstrate that the failure that led to the imposition of 
the sanction has been corrected.
    (d) Protection of Access to Benefits.--The Secretary shall take 
actions under this section with respect to a State only in a manner 
that assures the continuous coverage of eligible individuals enrolled 
in community-rated health plans.

SEC. 1413. REDUCTION IN PAYMENTS FOR HEALTH PROGRAMS BY SECRETARY OF 
              HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Upon a determination by the Secretary under 
section 1412(b)(1), the Secretary shall reduce the amount of any of the 
payments described in subsection (b) that would otherwise be made to 
individuals and entities in the State by such amount as the Secretary 
determines to be appropriate.
    (b) Payments Described.--The payments described in this subsection 
are as follows:
            (1) Payments to academic health centers in the State under 
        subtitle B of title III.
            (2) Payments to individuals and entities in the State for 
        health research activities under section 301 and title IV of 
        the Public Health Service Act.
            (3) Payments to hospitals in the State under part 4 of 
        subtitle E of title III (relating to payments to hospitals 
        serving vulnerable populations).

SEC. 1414. REVIEW OF FEDERAL DETERMINATIONS.

    Any State affected by a determination by the Secretary under this 
subpart may appeal such determination in accordance with section 5531.

SEC. 1415. FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR STATE IMPLEMENTATION.

    (a) Planning Grants.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, to the extent 
        amounts are appropriated, make available to each State a 
        planning grant to assist the State in the development of a 
        health care system necessary to enable the State to become a 
        participating State under this title.
            (2) Formula.--The Secretary shall establish a formula for 
        the distribution of funds made available under this subsection.
            (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
        to be appropriated $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 
        1995 and 1996 for grants under this subsection.
    (b) Grants for Start-up Support.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall, to the extent amounts 
        are appropriated, make available to States, upon their becoming 
        participating States, grants to assist in the establishment of 
        purchasing cooperatives.
            (2) Formula.--The Secretary shall establish a formula for 
        the distribution of funds made available under this subsection.
            (3) State matching funds required.--Funds are payable to a 
        State under this subsection only if the State provides 
        assurances, satisfactory to the Secretary, that amounts of 
        State funds (at least equal to the amount made available under 
        this subsection) will be expended for the purposes described in 
        paragraph (1).
            (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
        to be appropriated $313,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
        $625,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $313,000,000 for fiscal 
        year 1998, for grants under this subsection.

        Subpart C--Responsibilities in Absence of State Systems

SEC. 1421. APPLICATION OF SUBPART.

    (a) Initial Application.--This subpart shall apply with respect to 
a State as of January 1, 1997, unless--
            (1) the State submits a plan for a State system under 
        section 1411(a)(1) by July 1, 1996, and
            (2) the Secretary determines under section 1411 that such 
        system meets the requirements of subtitle F.
    (b) Termination of Approval of System of Participating State.--In 
the case of a participating State for which the Secretary terminates 
approval of the State system under section 1412(b)(2), this subpart 
shall apply with respect to the State as of such date as is appropriate 
to assure the continuity of coverage for the standard benefit package 
for eligible individuals in the State.

SEC. 1422. FEDERAL ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITIES IN NON-PARTICIPATING 
              STATES.

    Upon determining that this subpart will apply to a State for a 
calendar year, the Secretary shall take such steps as are necessary to 
ensure that the standard benefit package is provided to eligible 
individuals in the State during the year, including the establishment 
of community-rating areas within such State as appropriate.

SEC. 1423. IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE ON PREMIUMS UNDER FEDERALLY-OPERATED 
              SYSTEM.

    If this subpart applies to a State for a calendar year, the 
premiums charged by community-rated health plans in the State shall be 
equal to premiums that would otherwise be charged, increased by 15 
percent. Such 15 percent increase shall be used to reimburse the 
Secretary for any administrative or other expenses incurred as a result 
of establishing and operating the system in that State.

SEC. 1424. RETURN TO STATE OPERATION.

    (a) Application Process.--After the establishment and operation of 
a system by the Secretary in a State under section 1422, the State may 
at any time apply to the Secretary for the approval of a State system 
in accordance with the procedures described in section 1411.
    (b) Timing.--If the Secretary approves the system of a State for 
which the Secretary has operated a system under this subpart during a 
year, the Secretary shall terminate the operation of the system, and 
the State shall establish and operate its approved system, as of 
January 1 of the first year beginning after the Secretary approves the 
State system. The termination of the Secretary's system and the 
operation of the State's system shall be conducted in a manner that 
assures the continuous coverage of eligible individuals in the State 
under community-rated health plans.

    Subpart D--Establishment of Class Factors for Charging Premiums

SEC. 1431. PREMIUM CLASS AND AGE CLASS FACTORS.

    (a) In General.--For purposes of this title and title X, the 
Secretary shall establish premium class and age class factors in 
accordance with section 1113(c).
    (b) Conditions.--In establishing such factors, the factor for the 
class of individual enrollment shall be 1 and the factor for the 
couple-only class of family enrollment shall be 2.

 Subpart E--Risk Adjustment and Reinsurance Methodology for Payment of 
                                 Plans

SEC. 1435. DEVELOPMENT OF A RISK ADJUSTMENT AND REINSURANCE 
              METHODOLOGY.

    (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall develop a risk adjustment 
and reinsurance methodology in accordance with section 1504.
    (b) Research and Demonstration.--The Secretary shall conduct and 
support research and demonstration projects to develop and improve, on 
a continuing basis, the risk adjustment and reinsurance methodology 
under this subpart.
    (c) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to States in implementing the methodology developed under 
this subpart.

         Subpart F--Responsibilities for Financial Requirements

SEC. 1441. CAPITAL STANDARDS FOR COMMUNITY-RATED PLANS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish, in consultation 
with the States, minimum capital requirements for carriers, for 
purposes of section 1118.
    (b) $500,000 Minimum.--Subject to subsection (c), under such 
requirements there shall be not less than $500,000 of capital 
maintained for each carrier.
    (c) Additional Capital Requirements.--The Secretary shall establish 
standards that provide for additional capital for purposes of this 
section. The amount of such additional capital required shall reflect 
factors likely to affect the financial stability of a carrier, 
including the following:
            (1) Projected plan enrollment and number of providers 
        participating in plans of the carrier.
            (2) Market share and strength of competition.
            (3) Extent and nature of risk-sharing with participating 
        providers and the financial stability of risk-sharing 
        providers.
            (4) Prior performance of the carrier, risk history, and 
        liquidity of assets.
    (d) Community- and Provider-Based Plans.--
            (1) In general.--States shall consider alternative 
        financial instruments and methods for community- and provider-
        based plans (as defined in paragraph (2)) to meet the capital 
        and solvency standards developed in accordance with this 
        section. Provisions made for such plans shall ensure the fiscal 
        integrity and financial solvency of such plans.
            (2) Eligible plans.--Plans eligible for special 
        consideration by States must be offered by public or not-for-
        profit entities that are owned, or in which a majority share of 
        the plan's investment is held by--
                    (A) health care providers who practice in the plan;
                    (B) individuals who live in the area, or not-for-
                profit organizations located in the area serviced by 
                the plan;
                    (C) a combination of individuals and organizations 
                described in subparagraphs (A) and (B); or
                    (D) organizations located outside the service area 
                which provide for control over local operations by 
                individuals described in subparagraphs (A) or (B).
    (e) Development of Standards by NAIC.--The Secretary may request 
the National Association of Insurance Commissioners to develop model 
standards for the additional capital requirements described in 
subsection (c) and to present such standards to the Secretary not later 
than July 1, 1995. The Secretary may accept such standards as the 
standards to be applied under subsection (c) or modify the standards in 
any appropriate manner.

SEC. 1442. STANDARD FOR GUARANTY FUNDS.

    (a) In General.--In consultation with the States, the Secretary 
shall establish standards for guaranty funds established by States for 
community-rated health plans.
    (b) Guaranty Fund Standards.--The standards established under 
subsection (a) for a guaranty fund shall include the following:
            (1) Each fund must have a method to generate sufficient 
        resources to pay health providers and others in the case of a 
        failure of a health plan in order to meet obligations with 
        respect to--
                    (A) services rendered by the health plan for the 
                standard benefit package, including any supplemental 
                coverage for cost sharing provided by the health plan, 
                and
                    (B) services rendered prior to health plan 
                insolvency and services to patients after the 
                insolvency but prior to their enrollment in other 
                health plans.
            (2) Each fund shall be liable for all claims against the 
        plan by health care providers with respect to their provision 
        of items and services covered under the standard benefit 
        package to enrollees of the failed plan. Such claims, in full, 
        shall take priority over all other claims. The fund is liable, 
        to the extent and in the manner provided in accordance with 
        rules established by the Secretary, for other claims, including 
        other claims of such providers and the claims of contractors, 
        employees, governments, or any other claimants.
            (3) The fund stands as a creditor for any payments owed the 
        plan to the extent of the payments made by the fund for 
        obligations of the plan.
            (4) The fund has authority to borrow against future 
        assessments in order to meet the obligations of failed plans 
        participating in the fund.

                       Subpart G--Open Enrollment

SEC. 1445. PERIODS OF AUTHORIZED CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT.

    The Secretary shall specify periods of enrollment in accordance 
with section 1112(c).

SEC. 1446. DISTRIBUTION OF COMPARATIVE INFORMATION.

    The Secretary shall specify a period of time prior to open 
enrollment during which States must provide for the distribution to 
community-rated individuals enrollment materials and comparative 
information on health plans and purchasing cooperatives.

                 PART 2--ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY PROVIDERS

SEC. 1461. CERTIFICATION.

    For purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall certify as an 
``essential community provider'' any health care provider or 
organization that--
            (1) is within any of the categories of providers and 
        organizations specified in section 1462(a), or
            (2) meets the standards for certification under section 
        1463(a).

SEC. 1462. CATEGORIES OF PROVIDERS AUTOMATICALLY CERTIFIED.

    (a) In General.--The categories of providers and organizations, 
including subrecipients, specified in this subsection are as follows:
            (1) Category 1 entities.--The following entities shall be 
        considered category 1 entities:
                    (A) Covered entities as defined in section 
                340B(a)(4) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
                256b(a)(4)), except that subsections (a)(4)(L)(iii) and 
                (a)(7) of such section shall not apply.
                    (B) School health services centers under title III.
                    (C) Public or nonprofit hospitals--
                            (i) that meet the criteria for public 
                        hospitals which are eligible entities under 
                        section 340B of the Public Health Service Act 
                        in any cost reporting period in the 3-year 
                        period prior to the date of enactment of this 
                        Act, except that subsection (a)(4)(L)(iii) of 
                        such section shall not apply; or
                            (ii) meeting alternative criteria developed 
                        by the Secretary after the date of enactment of 
                        this Act which are comparable to the criteria 
                        utilized in determining eligibility under such 
                        section 340B;
                    (D) Public and private, nonprofit mental health and 
                substance abuse providers receiving funds under title V 
                or XIX of the Public Health Service Act.
                    (E) Runaway homeless youth centers or transitional 
                living programs for homeless youth providing health 
                services under the Runaway Homeless Youth Act of 1974 
                (42 U.S.C. 5701 et seq.).
                    (F) Public or nonprofit maternal and child health 
                providers that receive funding under title V of the 
                Social Security Act.
                    (G) Rural health clinics as defined under section 
                1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act.
                    (H) Programs of the Indian Health Service (as 
                defined in section 8302(3)).
            (2) Category 2 entities.--The following entities shall be 
        considered category 2 entities:
                    (A) Medicare dependent small rural hospitals under 
                section 1886(d)(8)(iii) of the Social Security Act.
                    (B) Children's hospitals meeting comparable 
                criteria determined appropriate by the Secretary.
    (b) Study of Federally Certified Rural Health Clinics.--The 
Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the Rural Health Clinics 
program as defined in section 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act to 
examine the causes of the growth in the program and the characteristics 
of providers certified as rural health clinics and the characteristics 
of the population served by rural health clinics to ensure that the 
program meets the needs of rural underserved communities. The Secretary 
shall report the findings of such evaluation, together with any 
recommended changes in the rural health clinics program, to the 
Congress not later than January 1, 1996.

SEC. 1463. STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONAL PROVIDERS.

    (a) Standards.--The Secretary shall publish standards for the 
certification of additional categories of health care providers and 
organizations as essential community providers, including the 
categories described in subsection (b). Such a health care provider or 
organization shall not be certified unless the Secretary determines, 
under such standards, that health plans operating in the area served by 
the applicant would not otherwise be able to assure adequate access to 
items and services included in the standard benefit package if such a 
provider was not so certified.
    (b) Categories To Be Included.--The categories described in this 
subsection are as follows:
            (1) Certain health professionals.--A health professional 
        who--
                    (A) for at least 20 hours per week--
                            (i) is located in an area (or areas) 
                        designated as a health professional shortage 
                        area (under section 332 of the Public Health 
                        Service Act) or serves a population (or 
                        populations) designated as a medically 
                        underserved population (under section 330 of 
                        the Public Health Service Act); or
                            (ii)(I) is located or provides services in 
                        a neighborhood or community whose residents are 
                        at risk of underservice; and
                            (II) is available to patients at such 
                        location on evenings and weekends; and
                    (B) if the health professional is a physician--
                            (i) is licensed to practice in the 
                        jurisdiction; and
                            (ii) is either--
                                    (I) granted privileges to practice 
                                at one or more hospitals; or
                                    (II) has a consultation and 
                                referral arrangement with one or more 
                                physicians who are granted privileges 
                                to practice at one or more hospitals.
            (2) Institutional providers.--Public and private nonprofit 
        hospitals and other public and nonprofit institutional health 
        care providers, including family planning clinics, located in 
        health professional shortage areas (as defined under section 
        332 of the Public Health Service Act) or receiving funding 
        under subtitle E of title III of this Act).
            (3) Other providers.--
                    (A) In general.--Other public and private nonprofit 
                agencies and organizations that--
                            (i) are located in such an area or 
                        providing health services to such a population, 
                        and
                            (ii) provide health care and services 
                        essential to residents of such an area or such 
                        populations.
                    (B) Nonprofit hospitals.--Nonprofit hospitals with 
                a minimum of 200 beds, located in urban areas where--
                            (i) the cumulative total of its services 
                        provided to individuals who are entitled to 
                        benefits under title XVIII of the Social 
                        Security Act or under a State plan under title 
                        XIX of such Act equals a minimum of 65 percent; 
                        and
                            (ii) a minimum of 20 percent of its 
                        services are provided to individuals eligible 
                        for assistance under such title XIX.

SEC. 1464. CERTIFICATION PROCESS; REVIEW; TERMINATION OF 
              CERTIFICATIONS.

    (a) Certification Process.--
            (1) Publication of procedures.--The Secretary shall 
        publish, not later than 6 months after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act, the procedures to be used by health care 
        professionals, providers, agencies, and organizations seeking 
        certification under this subpart, including the form and manner 
        in which an application for such certification is to be made.
            (2) Timely determination.--The Secretary shall make a 
        determination upon such an application not later than 60 days 
        (or 15 days in the case of a certification for an entity 
        described in section 1462) after the date the complete 
        application has been submitted. The determination on an 
        application for certification of an entity described in section 
        1462 shall only involve the verification that the entity is an 
        entity described in such section.
    (b) Review of Certifications.--The Secretary shall periodically 
review whether professionals, providers, agencies, and organizations 
certified under this subpart continue to meet the requirements for such 
certification.
    (c) Termination or Denial of Certification.--
            (1) Preliminary finding.--If the Secretary preliminarily 
        finds that an entity seeking certification under this section 
        does not meet the requirements for such certification or such 
        an entity certified under this subpart fails to continue to 
        meet the requirements for such certification, the Secretary 
        shall notify the entity of such preliminary finding and permit 
        the entity an opportunity, under subtitle C of title V, to 
        rebut such findings.
            (2) Final determination.--If, after such opportunity, the 
        Secretary continues to find that such an entity continues to 
        fail to meet such requirements, the Secretary shall terminate 
        the certification and shall notify the entity and the State of 
        such termination and the effective date of the termination.

SEC. 1465. NOTIFICATION OF PARTICIPATING STATES.

    (a) In General.--Not less often than annually the Secretary shall 
notify each participating State of essential community providers that 
have been certified under this subpart.
    (b) Contents.--Such notice shall include sufficient information to 
permit each State to notify health plans of the identity of each entity 
certified as an essential community provider, including--
            (1) the location of the provider within each plan's service 
        area,
            (2) the health services furnished by the provider, and
            (3) other information necessary for health plans to carry 
        out this subpart.

SEC. 1466. HEALTH PLAN REQUIREMENT.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Category 1 entities.--With respect to each essential 
        community provider described in section 1462(a)(1) (other than 
        a provider of school health services) that makes an election 
        under subsection (d), that serves the health plan service area 
        of such health plan, and that requests participation under this 
        section, a health plan shall either--
                    (A) enter into a written provider participation 
                agreement (described in subsection (b)) with such 
                providers, or
                    (B) enter into a written agreement under which the 
                plan shall make payments to such provider in accordance 
                with subsection (c).
            (2) Category 2 entities.--
                    (A) In general.--With respect to at least one 
                essential community provider described in subparagraph 
                (A) and at least one essential community provider 
                described in subparagraph (B) of section 1462(a)(2), 
                that makes an election under subsection (d), that 
                serves the health plan service area of such health 
                plan, and that requests participation under this 
                section, a health plan shall either--
                            (i) enter into a written provider 
                        participation agreement (described in 
                        subsection (b)) with such providers, or
                            (ii) enter into a written agreement under 
                        which the plan shall make payments to such 
                        provider in accordance with subsection (c).
                    (B) Exception.--A State, as part of the State plan 
                under section 1501(a), may submit to the Secretary for 
                approval a request that the Secretary permit the State 
                to--
                            (i) require health plans operating in 
                        certain community rating areas in the State to 
                        contract with more than one essential community 
                        provider of each type referred to in 
                        subparagraph (A), based on geographic 
                        proximity, cultural and language needs, 
                        capacity to meet the needs of enrollees, or 
                        other factors determined relevant by the State; 
                        and
                            (ii) establish additional types of 
                        essential community providers under section 
                        1462(a)(2) that a health plan must contract 
                        with under subparagraph (A).
                    (C) Discretion of secretary.--With respect to a 
                State request under subparagraph (B), the Secretary 
                shall--
                            (i) approve such request; or
                            (ii) require the designation of such 
                        additional essential community providers in the 
                        State as the Secretary determines necessary.
    (b) Participation Agreement.--A participation agreement between a 
health plan and an electing essential community provider under this 
subsection shall provide that the health plan agrees to treat the 
provider in accordance with terms and conditions the same as those that 
are applicable to other providers participating in the health plan with 
respect to each of the following:
            (1) The scope of services for which payment is made by the 
        plan to the provider.
            (2) The rate of payment for covered care and services.
            (3) The availability of financial incentives to 
        participating providers.
            (4) Limitations on financial risk provided to other 
        participating providers.
            (5) Assignment of enrollees to participating providers.
            (6) Access by the provider's patients to providers in 
        medical specialties or subspecialties participating in the 
        plan.
    (c) Payments for Providers Without Participation Agreements.--
            (1) In general.--Payment in accordance with this subsection 
        is payment based, as elected by the electing essential 
        community provider, either--
                    (A) on the fee schedule developed by the State; or
                    (B) on payment methodologies and rates used under 
                the applicable Medicare payment methodology and rates 
                (or the most closely applicable methodology under such 
                program as the Secretary specifies in regulations).
            (2) Special rule for federally qualified health centers.--
        With respect to each federally qualified health center (as such 
        term is defined in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act) 
        that is an essential community provider, a health plan shall 
        make payments based on the reasonable cost rates applicable 
        under section 1833(a)(3) of the Social Security Act, except 
        that the federally qualified health center may accept other 
        payment amounts.
            (3) No application of gate-keeper limitations.--Payment in 
        accordance with this subsection may be subject to utilization 
        review, but may not be subject to otherwise applicable 
        gatekeeper requirements under the plan.
    (d) Election.--
            (1) In general.--In this part, the term ``electing 
        essential community provider'' means, with respect to a health 
        plan, an essential community provider certified under this 
        subpart that elects under this subpart to apply to the health 
        plan.
            (2) Form of election.--An election under this subsection 
        shall be made in a form and manner specified by the Secretary, 
        and shall include notice to the health plan involved. Such an 
        election may be made annually with respect to a health plan, 
        except that the plan and provider may agree to make such an 
        election on a more frequent basis.
    (e) Special Rule for Providers of School Health Services.--A health 
plan shall pay, to each provider of school health services located in 
the plan's service area, an amount determined by the Secretary for such 
services furnished to enrollees of the plan.

SEC. 1467. RECOMMENDATION ON CONTINUATION OF REQUIREMENT.

    (a) Studies.--In order to prepare recommendations under subsection 
(b), the Secretary shall conduct studies regarding essential community 
providers, including studies that assess--
            (1) the definition of essential community provider,
            (2) the sufficiency of the funding levels for providers, 
        including the special rule for federally qualified health 
        centers under section 1466(c)(2), for both covered and 
        uncovered benefits under this Act,
            (3) the effects of contracting requirements relating to 
        such providers on such providers, health plans, and enrollees,
            (4) the impact of the payment rules for such providers, and
            (5) the impact of national health reform on such providers.
    (b) Recommendations to and Consideration by Congress.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress, 
        specific recommendations concerning whether, and to what 
        extent, section 1466 should continue to apply to some or all 
        essential community providers. Such recommendations may include 
        a description of the particular types of such providers and 
        circumstances under which such section should continue to 
        apply.
            (2) Joint resolution and consideration by congress.--
                    (A) In general.--The recommendations under 
                paragraph (1) shall be implemented unless a joint 
                resolution (described in subparagraph (B)) disapproving 
                such recommendations is enacted in accordance with the 
                provisions of subparagraph (C), before the end of the 
                45-day period beginning on the date on which such 
                recommendations were submitted. For purposes of 
                applying the preceding sentence and subparagraphs (B) 
                and (C), the days on which either House of Congress is 
                not in session because of an adjournment of more than 
                three days to a day certain shall be excluded in the 
                computation of a period.
                    (B) Joint resolution of disapproval.--A joint 
                resolution described in this subparagraph means only a 
                joint resolution which is introduced within the 10-day 
                period beginning on the date on which the Secretary 
                submits recommendations under paragraph (1) and--
                            (i) which does not have a preamble;
                            (ii) the matter after the resolving clause 
                        of which is as follows: ``That Congress 
                        disapproves the recommendations of the 
                        Secretary of Health and Human Services 
                        concerning the extension of certain essential 
                        community provider provisions, as submitted by 
                        the Secretary on 2/32/32/32/32/32/32/3.'', the 
                        blank space being filled in with the 
                        appropriate date; and
                            (iii) the title of which is as follows: 
                        ``Joint resolution disapproving recommendations 
                        of the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
                        concerning the extension of certain essential 
                        community provider provisions, as submitted by 
                        the Secretary on 2/32/32/32/32/32/32/3.'', the 
                        blank space being filled in with the 
                        appropriate date.
                    (C) Procedures for consideration of resolution of 
                disapproval.--Subject to subparagraph (D), the 
                provisions of section 2908 (other than subsection (a)) 
                of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 
                shall apply to the consideration of a joint resolution 
                described in subparagraph (B) in the same manner as 
                such provisions apply to a joint resolution described 
                in section 2908(a) of such Act.
                    (D) Special rules.--For purposes of applying 
                subparagraph (C) with respect to such provisions--
                            (i) any reference to the Committee on Armed 
                        Services of the House of Representatives shall 
                        be deemed a reference to an appropriate 
                        Committee of the House of Representatives 
                        (specified by the Speaker of the House of 
                        Representatives at the time of submission of 
                        recommendations under paragraph (1)) and any 
                        reference to the Committee on Armed Services of 
                        the Senate shall be deemed a reference to an 
                        appropriate Committee of the Senate (specified 
                        by the Majority Leader of the Senate at the 
                        time of submission of recommendations under 
                        paragraph (1)); and
                            (ii) any reference to the date on which the 
                        President transmits a report shall be deemed a 
                        reference to the date on which the Secretary 
                        submits a recommendation under paragraph (1).

SEC. 1468. DEFINITIONS.

    As used in subpart:
            (1) Children's hospital.--The term ``children's hospital'' 
        means those hospitals whose inpatients are certified by the 
        Secretary or the State to be predominantly under the age of 18.
            (2) Health professional.--The term ``health professional'' 
        means a physician, nurse, nurse practitioner, certified nurse 
        midwife, physician assistant, psychologist, dentist, 
        pharmacist, chiropractor, clinical social worker, and other 
        health care professional recognized by the Secretary.
            (3) Subrecipient.--The term ``subrecipient'' means, with 
        respect to a recipient of a grant under a particular authority, 
        an entity that--
                    (A) is receiving funding from such a grant under a 
                contract with the principal recipient of such a grant, 
                and
                    (B) meets the requirements established to be a 
                recipient of such a grant.

        PART 3--SPECIFIC RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECRETARY OF LABOR.

SEC. 1481. RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECRETARY OF LABOR.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Labor is responsible--
            (1) under subtitle D, for the enforcement of requirements 
        applicable to employers (including requirements relating to 
        payment of premiums under title X if applicable) and the 
        administration of large employer purchasing groups;
            (2) for the temporary assumption of the operation of self-
        insured employer sponsored health plans that are insolvent;
            (3) for carrying out any other responsibilities assigned to 
        the Secretary under this Act; and
            (4) for administering title I of the Employee Retirement 
        Income Security Act of 1974 as it relates to group health plans 
        maintained by large employer purchasing groups.
    (b) Agreements with States.--The Secretary of Labor may enter into 
agreements with States in order to enforce responsibilities of 
employers and large employer purchasing groups, and requirements of 
employer sponsored health plans, under subtitle B of title I of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
    (c) Consultation.--In carrying out activities under this Act with 
respect to large employer purchasing groups, employer sponsored health 
plans, and employers, the Secretary of Labor shall consult with the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services.
    (d) Guaranty Funds.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor shall establish 
        standards for guaranty funds to be established by a State with 
        respect to a self-insured plan operating wholly within the 
        State.
            (2) Multistate plans.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
        establish and administer a guaranty fund with respect to 
        multistate self-insured plans.
    (e) Employer-Related Requirements.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
        with the Secretary, shall be responsible for assuring that 
        employers--
                    (A) make payments of any employer premiums (and 
                withhold and make payment of the family share of 
                premiums with respect to qualifying employees) and 
                provide discounts to employees as required under this 
                Act, including auditing of collection activities with 
                respect to such payments,
                    (B) submit timely reports as required under this 
                Act, and
                    (C) otherwise comply with requirements imposed on 
                employers under this Act.
            (2) Audit and similar authorities.--The Secretary of 
        Labor--
                    (A) may carry out such audits (directly or through 
                contract) and such investigations of employers and 
                States and large employer purchasing groups,
                    (B) may exercise such authorities under section 504 
                of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (in 
                relation to activities under this Act),
                    (C) may provide (through contract or otherwise) for 
                such collection activities (in relation to amounts owed 
                to large employer purchasing groups, and for the 
                benefit of such groups), and
                    (D) may impose such civil penalties in accordance 
                with this Act,
        as may be necessary to carry out such Secretary's 
        responsibilities under this section.
            (3) Auditing of employer payments.--
                    (A) In general.--Each State is responsible for 
                auditing the records of community-rated employers to 
                assure that employer payments (including the payment of 
                amounts withheld) were made in the appropriate amount 
                as provided under subtitle B of title X.
                    (B) Employers with employees residing in different 
                community-rating areas.--In the case of a community-
                rated employer which has employees who reside in more 
                than one community rating area in more than one State, 
                the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the 
                Secretary, shall establish a process for the 
                coordination of State auditing activities among the 
                States involved.
                    (C) Appeal.--In the case of an audit conducted by a 
                State on an employer under this paragraph, an employer 
                or other State that is aggrieved by the determination 
                in the audit is entitled to review of such audit by the 
                Secretary of Labor in a manner to be provided by such 
                Secretary.
    (f) Authority.--The Secretary of Labor is authorized to issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out section 1305 and 
responsibilities of the Secretary under this Act.

SEC. 1482. FEDERAL ROLE WITH RESPECT TO MULTISTATE SELF-INSURED HEALTH 
              PLANS.

    (a) In General.--In the case of a multistate self-insured health 
plan or a multistate self-insured supplemental health benefits plan, 
the Secretary of Labor shall be responsible for certifying such plans 
and carrying out activities under this title in the same manner as a 
participating State would carry out activities under this title with 
respect to a standard health plan.
    (b) Self-Insured Plan Standards.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
develop and publish standards applicable to self-insured plans offered 
by large employers. The Secretary shall develop and publish such 
standards by not later than the date that is 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act. Such standards shall be the certified standard 
health plan standards applicable to self-insured plans under this 
title.
    (c) Determination of Multistate Status.--For purposes of this Act, 
a self-insured health plan or a self-insured supplemental health 
benefits plan shall be considered a multistate health plan if 
established or maintained by an experience-rated employer which has a 
substantial number of employees enrolled in such plan in each of 2 or 
more States (as determined by the Secretary of Labor).

SEC. 1483. ASSISTANCE WITH EMPLOYER COLLECTIONS.

    The Secretary of Labor shall provide States with such technical and 
other assistance as may promote the efficient collection of all amounts 
owed under this Act by employers.

SEC. 1484. PENALTIES FOR FAILURE OF LARGE EMPLOYER PURCHASING GROUPS TO 
              MEET REQUIREMENTS.

    If the Secretary of Labor finds that a large employer purchasing 
group has failed substantially to meet the applicable requirements of 
subtitle D, the Secretary shall impose a civil money penalty of not to 
exceed $10,000 for each such violation.

SEC. 1485. APPLICABILITY OF ERISA ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS FOR 
              ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

    The provisions of sections 502 (relating to civil enforcement), 504 
(relating to investigative authority) and 506 (relating to criminal 
enforcement) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
shall apply to enforcement by the Secretary of Labor of the applicable 
requirements for large group purchasers in the same manner and to same 
extent as such provisions apply to enforcement of title I of such Act.

SEC. 1486. WORKPLACE WELLNESS PROGRAM.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall develop certification criteria 
for workplace wellness programs.
    (b) Application of Section.--Any health plan may offer a uniform 
premium discount, not to exceed 5 percent, to employers maintaining 
certified workplace wellness programs.

                 PART 4--OFFICE OF RURAL HEALTH POLICY

SEC. 1491. OFFICE OF RURAL HEALTH POLICY.

    (a) Appointment of Assistant Secretary.--
            (1) In general.--Section 711(a) of the Social Security Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 912(a)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``by a Director, who shall advise 
                the Secretary'' and inserting ``by an Assistant 
                Secretary for Rural Health (in this section referred to 
                as the `Assistant Secretary'), who shall report 
                directly to the Secretary''; and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following new 
                sentence: ``The Office shall not be a component of any 
                other office, service, or component of the 
                Department.''.
            (2) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 711(b) of the 
        Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 912(b)) is amended by striking 
        ``the Director'' and inserting ``the Assistant Secretary''.
            (B) Section 338J(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
        U.S.C. 254r(a)) is amended by striking ``Director of the Office 
        of Rural Health Policy'' and inserting ``Assistant Secretary 
        for Rural Health''.
            (C) Section 464T(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
        U.S.C. 285p-2(b)) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph 
        (1) by striking ``Director of the Office of Rural Health 
        Policy'' and inserting ``Assistant Secretary for Rural 
        Health''.
            (D) Section 6213 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
        of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 1395x note) is amended in subsection (e)(1) 
        by striking ``Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy'' 
        and inserting ``Assistant Secretary for Rural Health''.
            (E) Section 403 of the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS 
        Resources Emergency Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 300ff-11 note) is 
        amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) of subsection (a) 
        by striking ``Director of the Office of Rural Health Policy'' 
        and inserting ``Assistant Secretary for Rural Health''.
            (3) Amendment to the executive schedule.--Section 5315 of 
        title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Assistant 
        Secretaries of Health and Human Services (5)'' and inserting 
        ``Assistant Secretaries of Health and Human Services (6)''.
    (b) Expansion of Duties.--Section 711(a) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 912(a)) is amended by striking ``and access to (and the 
quality of) health care in rural areas'' and inserting ``access to, and 
quality of, health care in rural areas, and reforms to the health care 
system and the implications of such reforms for rural areas''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1996.

            Subtitle F--Participating State Responsibilities

                    PART 1--GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES

SEC. 1501. STATE PLAN AND CERTIFICATION OF STANDARD HEALTH PLANS AND 
              SUPPLEMENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS PLANS.

    (a) State Plan.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of the approval of a State 
        health care system by the Secretary under section 1411, a State 
        is a ``participating State'' if the State meets the applicable 
        requirements of this subtitle.
            (2) Submission of plan.--In order to be approved as a 
        participating State under section 1411, a State shall submit to 
        the Secretary a State plan (in a form and manner specified by 
        the Secretary) that describes the State health care system that 
        the State is establishing (or has established).
            (3) Deadline.--If a State is not a participating State with 
        a State health care system in operation by January 1, 1997, the 
        provisions of subpart C of part 1 of subtitle E (relating to 
        responsibilities in absence of State systems) shall take 
        effect.
            (4) Submission of information subsequent to approval.--A 
        State approved as a participating State under section 1411 
        shall submit to the Secretary an annual update to the State 
        health care system not later than February 15 of each year 
        following the first year for which the State is a participating 
        State. The update shall contain--
                    (A) such information as the Secretary may require 
                to determine that the system shall meet the applicable 
                requirements of this Act for the succeeding year; and
                    (B) such information as the Secretary may require 
                to determine that the State operated the system during 
                the previous year in accordance with the Secretary's 
                approval of the system for such previous year.
    (b) Health Plan Accreditation, Certification and Enforcement 
Program.--
            (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a program 
        for the accreditation, certification and enforcement of health 
        plan standards by States (hereafter referred to in this 
        subsection as the ``ACE program''). Under such program, the 
        Secretary shall--
                    (A) develop guidelines for the accreditation, 
                certification and enforcement of standards for 
                certified standard health plans;
                    (B) approve State ACE programs as meeting such 
                guidelines; and
                    (C) monitor the compliance of States with such 
                guidelines.
            (2) Program elements.--The guidelines referred to in 
        paragraph (1) shall include the following components:
                    (A) Certification.--State certification, and 
                recertification not less frequently than once during 
                each 3-year period, of standard health plans determined 
                by the State to be in compliance with the standards 
                established under subtitle B and with the regulations 
                promulgated by the Secretary concerning such standards.
                    (B) Disenrollment data.--State review of enrollee 
                disenrollment from each standard health plan to 
                determine whether there is a pattern of disenrollment 
                that does not reflect the distribution of such plans' 
                reenrolling membership.
                    (C) Monitoring.--State monitoring of the 
                performance of each standard health plan to ensure that 
                such plans continue to meet the criteria for 
                certification.
            (3) State programs.--Each participating State shall develop 
        accreditation, certification and enforcement programs in 
        accordance with the guidelines established by the Secretary 
        under paragraph (1).
            (4) Use of private organizations.--
                    (A) In general.--A State may utilize private 
                accreditation organizations to review the compliance by 
                standard health plans with specific standards with 
                which such organizations have demonstrated expertise. A 
                State may use such reviews as the basis for determining 
                plan compliance with such standards. The Secretary 
                shall approve eligible accreditation organizations and 
                promulgate regulations prohibiting conflicts of 
                interest in the use of such bodies by States.
                    (B) Limitations.--The use of private accreditation 
                organizations by a State under subparagraph (A) shall 
                not relieve such State of its obligations under this 
                subsection. In no case shall a State delegate 
                enforcement authority or enforcement responsibilities 
                to private organizations.
            (5) Enforcement.--A State ACE program shall establish a 
        process for imposing sanctions on standard health plans that 
        fail to comply with the standards established under this title. 
        Such sanctions may include--
                    (A) limiting or prohibiting new member enrollment;
                    (B) permitting existing members to disenroll from 
                the health plan without penalty;
                    (C) State operation of a health plan to provide 
                transitional access;
                    (D) the imposition of civil monetary penalties in 
                accordance with this Act;
                    (E) requiring that a plan follow a corrective 
                action plan developed by the State; and
                    (F) decertification or denial of recertification, 
                but only after the plan has been provided a reasonable 
                opportunity to comply with such standards.
            (6) Multi-state plans.--The Secretary of Labor, in 
        consultation with the Secretary, shall carry out all 
        certification and enforcement activities described in this 
        subsection with respect to multistate self-insured plans.
    (c) Other State Duties.--A participating State shall--
            (1) certify each purchasing cooperative that meets the 
        requirements of part 2 of subtitle D; and
            (5) administer the State subsidies as provided for in title 
        VI.
    (d) Effective Date.--Subsection (b) shall apply to standard health 
plans and supplemental health benefits plans sold, issued, or renewed 
on or after January 1, 1997.

SEC. 1502. COMMUNITY RATING AREAS AND HEALTH PLAN SERVICE AREAS.

    (a) In General.--In accordance with this section, each 
participating State shall, subject to approval by the Secretary, 
provide for the division of the State into 1 or more community rating 
areas.
    (b) Multiple Areas.--With respect to a community rating area--
            (1) no metropolitan statistical area in a State may be 
        incorporated into more than 1 such area in the State;
            (2) the number of individuals residing within such an area 
        may not be less than 250,000; and
            (3) no area incorporated in a community rating area may be 
        incorporated into another such area.
    (c) Boundaries.--
            (1) In general.--In establishing boundaries for community 
        rating areas, a participating State shall comply with the 
        antidiscrimination requirements of section 1602.
            (2) Coordinating multiple community rating areas.--Nothing 
        in this section shall be construed as preventing a 
        participating State from coordinating the activities of one or 
        more community rating areas in the State.
            (3) Interstate community rating areas.--Community rating 
        areas with respect to interstate areas shall be established in 
        accordance with rules established by the Secretary.
            (4) Coordination in multi-state areas.--One or more 
        participating States may coordinate their operations in 
        contiguous community rating areas. Such coordination may 
        include, the following activities, adoption of joint operating 
        rules, contracting with standard health plans, enforcement 
        activities, and establishment of fee schedules for health 
        providers.
    (d) Health Plan Service Areas.--
            (1) In general.--Pursuant to guidelines developed under 
        paragraph (2), each State shall designate, by not later than 
        January 1, 192/32/3, health plan service areas.
            (2) Guidelines.--The State shall designate one or more 
        health plan service areas within each community rating area in 
        the State, that--
                    (A) prevent discrimination in accordance with 
                section 1602; and
                    (B) do not cross community rating area boundaries.

SEC. 1503. OPEN ENROLLMENT PERIODS.

    Each participating State, based on rules and procedures established 
by the Secretary, shall specify a uniform, annual open enrollment 
period for each community rating area during which all eligible 
individuals are permitted the opportunity to change enrollment among 
the standard health plans offered to such individuals in such area 
under this Act. The initial annual open enrollment period shall be for 
a period of 90 days.

SEC. 1504. RISK ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM.

    (a) Requirement for Implementation.--In accordance with rules 
established by the Secretary, each State shall implement a risk 
adjustment methodology developed by the Secretary under subsection (d).
    (b) State Risk Adjustment Organization.--Each State shall establish 
a State risk adjustment organization to carry out the adjustments 
required under the methodology implemented by the State under 
subsection (a) and make payments in accordance with subsection (c). 
Such organization shall meet standards established by the Secretary 
relating to organizational structure, operation, fiduciary 
responsibilities and financial management.
    (c) Adjustments and Payments.--
            (1) Classes of purchasers.--The Secretary shall specify 
        classes of individual health plan purchasers whose expected 
        expenditures are significantly higher than those of employed 
        individuals covered under community-rated plans.
            (2) Estimates.--The Secretary shall annually estimate the 
        amount by which the expected expenditures related to specified 
        high-cost community-rated individual health plan purchasers (as 
        specified by the Secretary under the methodologies developed 
        under subsection (a)) for the year involved will exceed the 
        expected average expenditures for other community-rated health 
        plan enrollees. Based on such estimates, the Secretary shall 
        develop a per capita adjustment amount with respect to each 
        community rating area.
            (3) Payments.--
                    (A) In general.--The State risk adjustment 
                organization shall, using the methodologies developed 
                by the Secretary under subsection (a), apply the per 
                capita adjustment amount to community-rated and 
                experience-rated (and multistate plans under 
                subparagraph (C)) health plans offered within each 
                community rating area in the State.
                    (B) Standard plans.--Standard health plans subject 
                to an assessment under subparagraph (A) shall make 
                payments to the State risk adjustment organization for 
                the State in which such plans provide coverage.
                    (C) Multistate plans.--A multistate community-rated 
                or experience-rated plan that is subject to an 
                assessment under subparagraph (A) shall make payments 
                to a single State risk adjustment organization and 
                provide such organization with information concerning 
                the geographic distribution of the enrollees in such 
                plan. Such organization shall determine the amount of 
                such payments that are applicable to each community-
                rating area and distribute such amounts to the 
                appropriate State risk adjustment organization.
                    (D) Distribution.--State risk adjustment 
                organizations shall distribute amounts collected under 
                this paragraph to community-rated or experience-rated 
                health plans that are determined to have expenditures 
                for items and services provided to enrolled individuals 
                that are greater than the average expenditures for 
                enrollees in standard health plans. The amounts of such 
                distributions shall be based on the methodology applied 
                by the organization involved.
    (d) Development of Methodologies.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 
        2/32/32/32/32/32/32/32/32/3, the Secretary, in consultation 
        with an advisory committee established by the Secretary, shall 
        develop a risk adjustment and reinsurance methodology for use 
        by States in accordance with this section.
            (2) Methodology.--
                    (A) Purposes.--The risk adjustment methodology 
                developed under paragraph (1) shall--
                            (i) ensure that assessments imposed on or 
                        payments provided to standard health plans 
                        reflect the expected relative utilization and 
                        expenditures for covered items and services by 
                        the enrollees of each plan compared to the 
                        average utilization and expenditures for all 
                        eligible individuals, and
                            (ii) protect standard health plans that 
                        enroll a disproportionate share of eligible 
                        individuals with respect to whom expected 
                        utilization of health care services (included 
                        in the benefit package) and expected health 
                        care expenditures for such services are greater 
                        than the average level of such utilization and 
                        expenditures for eligible individuals.
                    (B) Factors to be considered.--The methodology 
                shall take into account the following factors:
                            (i) Demographic characteristics.
                            (ii) Health status, including prior use of 
                        health services.
                            (iii) Geographic area of residence.
                            (iv) Socio-economic status.
                            (v) The cost sharing of the plan.
                            (vi) Any other factors determined by the 
                        Secretary to be material to the purposes 
                        described in subparagraph (A).
            (3) Special consideration for mental illness and mental 
        retardation.--In developing the methodology under this section, 
        the Secretary shall give consideration to the unique problems 
        of adjusting payments relating to health plans with respect to 
        individuals with mental illness and mental retardation.
            (4) Mandatory reinsurance.--
                    (A) In general.--The methodology developed under 
                this section shall include a system of mandatory 
                reinsurance as a component of the risk adjustment 
                methodology.
                    (B) Reinsurance system.--The Secretary, in 
                developing the methodology for a mandatory reinsurance 
                system under subparagraph (A), shall--
                            (i) provide for standard health plans to 
                        make payments to state-established reinsurance 
                        programs for the purpose of reinsuring all or 
                        part of the health care expenditures for items 
                        and services included in the standard benefit 
                        package for classes of high-cost individual 
                        health plan purchasers (as specified by the 
                        Secretary) or specific high-cost treatments or 
                        diagnosis; and
                            (ii) specify the manner of creation, 
                        structure, and operation of the system in each 
                        State, including--
                                    (I) the manner (which may be 
                                prospective or retrospective) in which 
                                standard health plans make payments to 
                                the system, and
                                    (II) the type and level of 
                                reinsurance coverage provided by the 
                                system.
            (5) Cost-sharing adjustment.--The standards developed by 
        the Secretary under this subsection shall include a cost-
        sharing adjustment mechanism to adjust for losses among all 
        standard health plans, except multistate self-insured health 
        plans, resulting from the reduced cost-sharing obligations of 
        individuals receiving assistance as is provided under the 
        program described in subtitle A of title VI.
            (6) Confidentiality of information.--The methodology shall 
        be developed under this section in a manner that is consistent 
        with privacy standards promulgated under title V. In developing 
        such standards, the Secretary shall take into account any 
        potential need of States for certain individually identifiable 
        health information in order to carry out risk-adjustment and 
        reinsurance activities under this Act, but only to the minimum 
        extent necessary to carry out such activities and with 
        protections provided to minimize the identification of the 
        individuals to whom the information relates.

SEC. 1505. GUARANTY FUNDS.

    A State, in accordance with the standards established by the 
Secretary under section 1442, shall establish a State guaranty fund 
with respect to community-rated plans offered in such State. The State 
shall establish a separate guaranty fund with respect to self-insured 
plans operating in the State in accordance with section 1481.

SEC. 1506. ENROLLMENT ACTIVITIES.

    (a) Provider-Based Enrollment Mechanisms.--The Secretary shall 
promulgate rules regarding the establishment by each participating 
State, in accordance with section 6006, of provider-based enrollment 
mechanisms for individuals seeking care who are not enrolled in a 
standard health plan. Such rules shall include provisions requiring 
standard health plans to pay providers for care delivered to 
individuals prior to the individual's enrollment in the plan and be 
consistent with section 1114.
    (b) Coordination of Enrollment Activities.--Each participating 
State shall coordinate its activities, including plan enrollment and 
disenrollment activities, with other States in a manner specified by 
the Secretary that ensures continuous, nonduplicative coverage of 
community-rated and experience-rated individuals in standard health 
plans and that minimizes administrative procedures and paperwork.

SEC. 1507. RURAL AND MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.

    (a) In General.--If, in accordance with appropriate rules 
established by the Secretary, a State determines that there is 
inadequate access in the provision of health services by standard 
health plans in any area of a State, the State may authorize--
            (1) a standard health plan to be the only standard health 
        plan in the area; or
            (2) two or more standard health plans to take joint action 
        to develop and implement a program.
    (b) Medically Underserved Area Defined.--For purposes of this 
subtitle the term ``medically underserved area'' means an urban or 
rural area designated by the Secretary as an area with a shortage of 
health professional or of health services or facilities.

SEC. 1508. PUBLIC ACCESS SITES.

    (a) Designation.--A State shall designate public access sites 
within each community rating area through which residents of such areas 
can obtain consumer information concerning health plans and purchasing 
cooperatives offered in such areas. Such sites shall be designated in a 
manner that ensures access to such information by health care 
consumers.
    (b) Information.--A State shall, through the public access sites 
designated under subsection (a) and using the information provided to 
the State under sections 1125 and 1321(f)(6), prepare and make 
available information, in a comparative form, concerning standard 
health plans certified by the State and purchasing cooperatives 
operating in the State. The State shall provide such materials to 
employers located within the State.

SEC. 1509. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO POSSESSIONS OF THE UNITED STATES.

    (a) In General.--A possession of the United States shall be a 
participating State meeting the requirements of this Act only if there 
is an agreement in effect between the United States and such possession 
pursuant to which--
            (1) the laws of such possession impose a part B premium 
        recapture assessment (as defined in subsection (b));
            (2) nothing in any provision of law, including the law of 
        such possession, permits such possession to reduce or remit in 
        any way, directly or indirectly, any liability to such 
        possession by reason of such assessment;
            (3) any amount received in the Treasury of such possession 
        by reason of such assessment shall be paid (at such time and in 
        such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe) 
        to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund;
            (4) such assessment is coordinated with the assessment 
        imposed by section 59B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
        such that, for any period, an individual would be required to 
        pay (in the aggregate) not more than the applicable amount for 
        such period; and
            (5) the possession complies with such other requirements as 
        may be prescribed by the Secretary and the Secretary of the 
        Treasury to carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including 
        requirements prescribing the information individuals to whom 
        such assessment may apply shall furnish to the Secretary and 
        the Secretary of the Treasury.
    (b) Qualified Part B Premium Recapture Assessment.--In subsection 
(a), the term ``qualified medicare part B premium recapture 
assessment'' means an assessment imposed and collected by such a 
possession that is--
            (1) equivalent to the assessment imposed under section 59B 
        of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
            (2) imposed on all individuals who are bona fide residents 
        of the possession, to the extent such individuals have not paid 
        the assessment imposed under such section 59B to the United 
        States by reason of subsection (d)(5) of such section.

SEC. 1510. RIGHT OF RECOVERY OF CERTAIN TAXES AGAINST PROVIDERS.

    Each participating State shall provide that issuers and plan 
sponsors of certified standard health plans shall have the right of 
recovery against providers described in section 4518 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 and shall provide methods of enforcing such right.

                    PART 2--TREATMENT OF STATE LAWS

SEC. 1511. PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE LAWS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) Laws Restricting Plans Other Than Fee-for-Service Plans.--
Except as may otherwise be provided in this section, no State law shall 
apply to any services provided under a health plan that is not a fee-
for-service plan (or a fee-for-service component of a plan) if such law 
has the effect of prohibiting or otherwise restricting plans from--
            (1) limiting the number and type of health care providers 
        who participate in the plan;
            (2) requiring enrollees to obtain health services (other 
        than emergency services) from participating providers or from 
        providers authorized by the plan;
            (3) requiring enrollees to obtain a referral for treatment 
        by a specialized physician or health institution;
            (4) establishing different payment rates for participating 
        providers and providers outside the plan;
            (5) creating incentives to encourage the use of 
        participating providers; or
            (6) requiring the use of single-source suppliers for 
        pharmacy, non-serviced medical equipment, and other health 
        products and services.
    (b) Preemption of State Corporate Practice Acts.--Any State law 
related to the corporate practice of medicine and to provider ownership 
of health plans or other providers shall not apply to arrangements 
between health plans that are not fee-for-service plans and their 
participating providers.

SEC. 1512. OVERRIDE OF RESTRICTIVE STATE PRACTICE LAWS.

    (a) Override.--
            (1) In general.--No State may, through licensure or 
        otherwise, restrict the practice of any class of practitioners 
        beyond that which is justified by the education and training of 
        such practitioners.
            (2) Definition.--As used in this section, the term 
        ``practitioner'' means--
                    (A) a nurse practitioner;
                    (B) a certified nurse midwife;
                    (C) a nurse anesthetist;
                    (D) a clinical nurse specialist; and
                    (E) a physicians assistant;
                    that has been awarded a master's degree or 
                postmaster's certificate following the completion of an 
                accredited training program that prepares individuals 
                in advanced practitioner specialties and that is 
                authorized by the State to practice as such a 
                practitioner.
    (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
implement subsection (a) and shall ensure that appropriate technical 
assistance is available to States for the purpose of complying with 
this section.

                       PART 3--STATE FLEXIBILITY

                     Subpart A--Existing State Laws

SEC. 1521. CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING FEDERAL LAW WAIVERS.

    Nothing in this Act shall preempt any feature of a State health 
care system operating under a waiver granted before the date of the 
enactment of this Act under titles XVIII or XIX of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. or 1396 et seq.) or the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.).

SEC. 1522. HAWAII PREPAID HEALTH CARE ACT.

    (a) ERISA Waiver.--
            (1) In general.--Section 514(b)(5) of the Employee 
        Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(5)) 
        is amended to read as follows:
            ``(5)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), 
        subsection (a) shall not apply to the Hawaii Prepaid Health 
        Care Act (Haw. Rev. Stat. Sec. Sec. 393-1 through 393-51).
            ``(B) Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed to 
        exempt from subsection (a) any State tax law relating to 
        employee benefits plans.
            ``(C) If the Secretary of Labor notifies the Governor of 
        the State of Hawaii that as the result of an amendment to the 
        Hawaii Prepaid Health Care Act enacted after the date of the 
        enactment of this paragraph--
                    ``(i) the proportion of the population with health 
                care coverage under such Act is less than such 
                proportion on such date, or
                    ``(ii) the level of benefit coverage provided under 
                such Act is less than the actuarial equivalent of such 
                level of coverage on such date,
        subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to the 
        application of such amendment to such Act after the date of 
        such notification.''.
            (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
        shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
    (b) HSA Waiver.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall, at the request of the 
        Governor of the State of Hawaii and in accordance with this 
        section, grant a waiver to the State from the requirements of 
        this Act (other than the requirements specified in paragraph 
        (3)).
            (2) Scope of waiver.--The waiver granted under paragraph 
        (1) shall exempt--
                    (A) the State of Hawaii;
                    (B) health plans offered within the State; and
                    (C) health plan participants, including employers, 
                employees, residents, and health plan sponsors within 
                the State,
        from requirements otherwise applicable to the State and such 
        plans and participants.
            (3) Required compliance of other requirements.--The waiver 
        shall initially be granted under paragraph (1) if the State of 
        Hawaii demonstrates to the Secretary that the State maintains--
                    (A) a requirement that employers make premium 
                contributions comparable to the requirements of this 
                Act;
                    (B) a comprehensive benefit package (including cost 
                sharing) that is comparable with the requirements of 
                subtitle B of this title;
                    (C) a percentage of State population with health 
                care coverage that is not less than the national 
                average;
                    (D) a quality control mechanism and data system 
                that are comparable to the applicable requirements of 
                title V; and
                    (E) health care cost containment consistent with 
                the provisions of this Act.
            (4) Waiver period.--The waiver initially granted under 
        paragraph (1) shall extend for the period during which the 
        State of Hawaii continues to comply with the requirements 
        specified in paragraph (3). The Secretary may require the 
        State, every 5 years, to demonstrate to the Secretary the 
        State's continued compliance with such requirements.
            (5) Procedure in the event of non-compliance.--
                    (A) Notice.--If, at any time after granting a 
                waiver under paragraph (1), the Secretary finds that 
                the State of Hawaii is not meeting the requirements 
                specified in paragraph (3), the Secretary shall notify 
                the State of the Secretary's findings.
                    (B) Opportunity to contest.--The State may contest 
                the Secretary's findings under the procedures provided 
                under section 5231.
                    (C) Opportunity for correction.--
                            (i) Findings not contested.--If the State 
                        does not contest the Secretary's findings 
                        within the 30-day period beginning on the date 
                        of receipt of a notice of such findings, the 
                        State shall have--
                                    (I) a 90-day period beginning on 
                                such date to show a good faith effort 
                                to remedy the non-compliance, and
                                    (II) an additional 12-month period 
                                to take such actions as may be required 
                                to bring the State into compliance with 
                                the requirements specified in paragraph 
                                (3).
                            (ii) Contested findings.--If the State 
                        contests the Secretary's findings within such 
                        30-day period but such findings are upheld, the 
                        State shall have--
                                    (I) a 90-day period beginning on 
                                the date of final adjudication to show 
                                a good faith effort to remedy the non-
                                compliance, and
                                    (II) an additional 12-month period 
                                to take such actions as may be required 
                                to bring the State into compliance with 
                                the requirements specified in paragraph 
                                (3).
                    (D) Termination.--If the State fails to demonstrate 
                a good faith effort under subparagraph (C)(i)(I) or 
                (C)(ii)(I) or to take actions under subparagraph 
                (C)(i)(II) or (C)(ii)(II) within the time period 
                specified, the Secretary may revoke the waiver granted 
                in paragraph (1).
            (6) Cooperative agreement with the secretary.--The 
        Secretary shall enter into cooperative agreements with 
        appropriate officials of the State of Hawaii--
                    (A) to develop standards and reporting requirements 
                necessary for the issuance and maintenance of the 
                State's waiver under paragraph (1); and
                    (B) otherwise to effectuate the provisions of this 
                subsection.
            (7) Eligibility for federal funds provided to participating 
        states.--Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the 
        eligibility of the State of Hawaii to participate in any public 
        health initiative, grant, or financial aid program under this 
        Act (including the medicaid program under title XIX of the 
        Social Security Act), or the sharing of revenue resulting from 
        the amendments made by title VII, designed to implement the 
        purpose of this Act. The Secretary shall work with appropriate 
        officials of the State of Hawaii to develop comparable, 
        alternative standards to govern the State's entitlement under 
        title XI.

SEC. 1523. ALTERNATIVE STATE PROVIDER PAYMENT SYSTEMS.

    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a hospital 
reimbursement system operated by a State meets the requirements of 
section 1814(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(b)) and has 
been approved by the Secretary and in continuous operation since July 
1, 1977, the payment rates and methodologies required under the system 
for services provided in the State shall apply to all purchasers and 
payers, including those under employee welfare benefit plans authorized 
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
1001 et seq.), workers' compensation programs under State law, the 
Federal Employees' Compensation Act under chapter 81 of title 5, United 
States Code, and Federal employee health benefit plans under chapter 89 
of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 1524. ALTERNATIVE STATE HOSPITAL SERVICES PAYMENT SYSTEMS.

    (a) In General.--No State shall be prevented from enforcing--
            (1) a State system described in subsection (b), or
            (2) a State system described in subsection (c),
by any provision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) or chapter 81 or 89 of title 5, United States 
Code.
    (b) Reimbursement Control System.--A State system is described in 
this subsection if it is a State reimbursement control system in 
operation before the date of the enactment of this Act which--
            (1) applies to substantially all non-Federal acute care 
        hospitals in the State, and
            (2) regulates substantially all rates of payment (including 
        maximum charges) in the State for inpatient hospital services, 
        except payments made under title XVIII of the Social Security 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.).
    (c) Health Insurance Reform System.--A State system is described in 
this subsection if it is a State health insurance reform system in 
operation before the date of the enactment of this Act which requires 
any insurer (including a health maintenance organization) to comply 
with requirements governing open enrollment and community rating, 
including premium adjustments or other health care assessments, for the 
purpose of risk adjustment.
    (d) Effective Dates.--
            (1) Subsection (b).--In the case of a State system 
        described in subsection (b), the provisions of this section 
        shall apply before, on, and after the date of the enactment of 
        this Act.
            (2) Subsection (c).--In the case of a State system 
        described in subsection (c), the provisions of this section 
        shall apply before, on, and after the date of the enactment of 
        this Act, and before the effective date of section 1116 of this 
        Act.

         Subpart B--Requirements for State Single-Payer Systems

SEC. 1531. SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEM DESCRIBED.

    The Secretary shall approve an application of a State to operate a 
single-payer system if the Secretary finds that the system--
            (1) meets the requirements of section 1532; and
            (2)(A) in the case of a system offered throughout a State, 
        meets the requirements for a Statewide single-payer system 
        under section 1533; or
            (B) in the case of a system offered in a single community 
        rating area of a State, meets the requirements for an area 
        specific single-payer system under section 1534.

SEC. 1532. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEMS.

    Each single-payer system shall meet the following requirements:
            (1) Establishment by state.--The system is established 
        under State law, and State law provides for mechanisms to 
        enforce the requirements of the system.
            (2) Operation by state.--The system is operated by the 
        State or a designated agency of the State.
            (3) Enrollment of individuals.--
                    (A) Mandatory enrollment of all community-rated 
                individuals.--The system shall provide for the 
                enrollment of all community-rated individuals residing 
                in the State (or, in the case of an area-specific 
                single-payer system, in the community rating area) who 
                are not medicare-eligible individuals.
                    (B) Optional enrollment of medicare-eligible 
                individuals.--At the option of the State and if the 
                Secretary has approved an application submitted by the 
                State, the system may provide for the enrollment of 
                medicare-eligible individuals residing in the State 
                (or, in the case of an area-specific single-payer 
                system, in the community rating area).
                    (C) Optional enrollment of experience-rated 
                individuals.--
                            (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clause (ii), at the option of the State, a 
                        single-payer system may provide for the 
                        enrollment of experience-rated individuals 
                        residing in the State (or, in the case of an 
                        area-specific single-payer system, in the 
                        community rating area).
                            (ii) Participation by certain multistate 
                        plans.--The system shall not require 
                        participation by any experience-rated 
                        individual who is enrolled in a certified 
                        multistate self-insured standard health plan 
                        which is a multiemployer plan described in 
                        section 1013(10), or which is sponsored by an 
                        experience-rated employer sponsor with at least 
                        5,000 full-time employees.
                    (D) Options included in state system document.--A 
                State may not exercise any of the options described in 
                subparagraphs (B) or (C) for a year unless the State 
                included a description of the option in the submission 
                of its system document to the Secretary for the year 
                under section 1501(a).
                    (E) Exclusion of certain individuals.--A single-
                payer system may not require the enrollment of 
                veterans, active duty military personnel, and American 
                Indians.
            (4) Direct payment to providers.--
                    (A) In general.--With respect to providers who 
                furnish items and services included in the standard 
                benefits package established under subtitle C to 
                individuals enrolled in the system, the State shall 
                make payments directly, or through fiscal 
                intermediaries, to such providers and assume (subject 
                to subparagraph (B)) all financial risk associated with 
                making such payments.
                    (B) Capitated payments permitted.--Nothing in 
                subparagraph (A) shall be construed to prohibit 
                providers furnishing items and services under the 
                system from receiving payments on a capitated, at-risk 
                basis based on prospectively determined rates.
            (5) Provision of standard benefits package.--
                    (A) In general.--The system shall provide for 
                coverage of the standard benefits package established 
                under subtitle C, including the cost-sharing provided 
                under the package (subject to subparagraph (B)), to all 
                individuals enrolled in the system.
                    (B) Imposition of reduced cost-sharing.--The system 
                may decrease the cost-sharing otherwise provided in the 
                standard benefits package established under subtitle C 
                with respect to any individuals enrolled in the system 
                or any class of services included in the package, so 
                long as the system does not increase the cost-sharing 
                otherwise imposed with respect to any other individuals 
                or services.
            (6) Cost containment.--The system shall provide for 
        mechanisms to ensure, in a manner satisfactory to the 
        Secretary, that--
                    (A) the rate of growth in health care spending will 
                not be higher than the target established under this 
                Act;
                    (B) the expenditures described in subparagraph (A) 
                are computed and effectively monitored;
                    (C) automatic, mandatory, nondiscretionary 
                reductions in payments to health care providers will be 
                imposed to the extent required to assure that such per 
                capita expenditures do not exceed the applicable target 
                referred to in subparagraph (A); and
                    (D) Federal payments to a single payer State or 
                health care coverage area shall be limited to the 
                payments that would have been made in the absence of 
                the implementation of the single payer system.
            (7) Federal payments.--The system shall provide for 
        mechanisms to ensure, in a manner satisfactory to the 
        Secretary, that Federal payments to a single-payer State or 
        community rating area shall be limited to the payments that 
        would have been made in the absence of the implementation of 
        the single-payer system.
            (8) Requirements generally applicable to standard health 
        plans.--The system shall meet the requirements applicable to a 
        standard health plan, except that--
                    (A) the system does not have the authority provided 
                to standard health plans under section 1111(b)(3) 
                (relating to permissible limitations on the enrollment 
                of community-rated eligible individuals on the basis of 
                limits on the plan's capacity); and
                    (B) the system is not required to meet the 
                requirements of sections 1116 (relating to rating 
                limitations for community-rated market), 1123(a) 
                (relating to plan solvency), and section 1125 (relating 
                to restrictions on the marketing of plan materials).

SEC. 1533. SPECIAL RULES FOR STATES OPERATING STATEWIDE SINGLE-PAYER 
              SYSTEM.

    (a) In General.--In the case of a State operating a Statewide 
single-payer system--
            (1) the State shall operate the system throughout the 
        State; and
            (2) except as provided in subsection (b), the State shall 
        meet the requirements for participating States under part 1.
    (b) Exceptions to Certain Requirements for Participating States.--
In the case of a State operating a Statewide single-payer system, the 
State is not required to meet the following requirements otherwise 
applicable to participating States under part 1:
            (1) Establishment of community rating and service areas.--
        The requirements of sections 1502(a) (relating to the 
        establishment of community rating areas) and 1502(b) (relating 
        to the designation of health plan service areas).
            (2) Other references inapplicable.--Any requirement which 
        the Secretary determines is not appropriate to apply to a State 
        single-payer system.
    (c) Financing.--
            (1) In general.--A State operating a Statewide single-payer 
        system shall provide for the financing of the system using, at 
        least in part, a payroll-based financing system that requires 
        employers to pay at least the amount that the employers would 
        be required to pay if the employers were subject to the 
        requirements of title X (determined without regard to any 
        effective date).
            (2) Use of financing methods.--Such a State may use, 
        consistent with paragraph (1), any other method of financing.
    (d) Single-Payer State Defined.--In this title, the term ``single-
payer State'' means a State with a Statewide single-payer system in 
effect that has been approved by the Secretary in accordance with this 
part.

SEC. 1534. SPECIAL RULES FOR COMMUNITY RATING AREA-SPECIFIC SINGLE-
              PAYER SYSTEMS.

    (a) In General.--In the case of a State operating a community 
rating area specific single-payer system, except as provided in 
subsection (b), the State shall meet the requirements for participating 
States under part 1.
    (b) Exceptions to Certain Requirements for Participating States.--
            (1) Establishment of service areas.--The requirement of 
        section 1502(b) (relating to the designation of health plan 
        service areas).
            (2) Other references inapplicable.--Any requirement which 
        the Secretary determines is not appropriate to apply to a 
        community rating area specific single-payer system.

    Subpart C--Early Implementation of Comprehensive State Programs

SEC. 1541. EARLY IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPREHENSIVE STATE PROGRAMS

    (a) Application.--
            (1) In general.--In accordance with this section, each 
        State desiring to implement the reform standards established in 
        this Act before the applicable effective date for such 
        standards, may submit an application to the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services and the Secretary of Labor to request 
        approval of a State comprehensive health care reform program 
        established under State law which meets the requirements 
        specified in subsection (b).
            (2) Establishment of criteria.--The Secretaries shall 
        establish not later than January 1, 1995, criteria for--
                    (A) the approval of such applications, and
                    (B) the continuing review of such State programs 
                consistent with the provisions of subpart B of part 1.
            (3) Expedited procedure.--The Secretaries shall establish 
        an expedited procedure for the consideration and disposition of 
        applications under this subsection. The procedure established 
        by the Secretaries shall provide that such consideration and 
        disposition be completed within 90 days, and that if the 
        application is approved, multistate employers be notified of 
        such approval.
    (b) Requirements Specified.--The State program shall be consistent 
with the reform standards established in this Act and the interim and 
final (if any) regulations promulgated by the Secretaries, including--
            (1) a standardized benefits package meeting the 
        requirements established under subtitle C, or in the event such 
        requirements have not been fully promulgated on the date of the 
        application, the requirements for a qualified health 
        maintenance organization (as defined in section 1310(d) of the 
        Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300e-9(d));
            (2) insurance reforms and rating requirements as specified 
        under part 2 of subtitle B;
            (3) standards for health plans as specified under part 3 of 
        subtitle B;
            (4) the recognition of, and standards for, purchasing 
        cooperatives, as specified in part 2 of subtitle D;
            (5) compliance with the data collection and privacy 
        procedures established under subtitle B of title V;
            (6) uniform administrative procedures as specified in 
        section 1126;
            (7) the imposition of employer and individual 
        responsibilities as specified in part 1 of subtitle D and title 
        X (determined without regard to any effective date);
            (8) the establishment of the subsidy program under this 
        Act; and
            (9) health care cost containment under this Act.
    (c) Qualification for Federal Funds.--For purposes of this Act, a 
State with an approved State program under this section shall be 
considered a participating State and shall maintain such status if such 
State meets the requirements of this Act as such provisions become 
effective.
    (d) Employer Certification Process.--In the case of any multistate 
self-insured health plan, certification by the plan to the Secretary of 
Labor that such plan is in compliance with the applicable Federal 
standards described in subsection (b) shall satisfy compliance with any 
State program approved under this section.
    (e) Funding.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall pay 
over to each State with an approved application under this section for 
each calendar quarter ending before 1997 an amount equal to the 
estimated decrease in Federal expenditures (net of any estimated 
decrease in Federal revenues) for such quarter with respect to such 
State resulting from the implementation of the State comprehensive 
health care reform program.

                  Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 1601. PROVISION OF ITEMS OR SERVICES CONTRARY TO RELIGIOUS BELIEF 
              OR MORAL CONVICTION.

    A health professional or a health facility may not be required to 
provide an item or service in the standard benefit package if the 
professional or facility objects to doing so on the basis of a 
religious belief or moral conviction.

SEC. 1602. ANTIDISCRIMINATION.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, and 
any State, health plan, purchasing cooperative, employer, health 
program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, or other 
entity subject to this Act, shall not directly or through contractual 
arrangements--
            (1) deny or limit access to or the availability of health 
        care services, or otherwise discriminate in connection with the 
        provision of health care services; or
            (2) limit, segregate, or classify an individual in any way 
        which would deprive or tend to deprive such individual of 
        health care services, or otherwise adversely affect his or her 
        access to health care services;
on the basis of race, national origin, sex, religion, language, income, 
age, sexual orientation, disability, health status, or anticipated need 
for health services.
    (b) Application of Section to Specific Actions.--This section shall 
apply to, but is not limited to, the following actions:
            (1) The establishing of boundaries for community rating 
        areas under section 1502, the enrollment of individuals in a 
        health care plan or the marketing of a health care plan, and 
        the selection of providers or the setting of the terms or 
        conditions under which providers participate in a health care 
        plan or provider network.
            (2) The determination of the scope of services provided by 
        a health care plan, and the providing of such services and 
        determining of the site or location of health care facilities.
    (c) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
issue regulations to carry out this section.
    (d) Effect on Other Laws. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to 
limit the scope of, or the availability of relief under, any other 
Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination or providing relief 
therefore.

                         TITLE II--NEW BENEFITS

   Subtitle A--Coverage of Outpatient Prescription Drugs in Medicare

SEC. 2000. REFERENCES IN SUBTITLE.

    (a) Amendments to Social Security Act.--Except as otherwise 
specifically provided, whenever in this subtitle an amendment is 
expressed in terms of an amendment to or repeal of a section or other 
provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section 
or other provision of the Social Security Act.
    (b) References to OBRA.--In this title, the terms ``OBRA-1986'', 
``OBRA-1987'', ``OBRA-1989'', ``OBRA-1990'', and ``OBRA-1993'' refer to 
the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-509), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-203), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 (Public Law 101-239), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508), and the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-66), 
respectively.

           PART 1--COVERAGE OF OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS

SEC. 2001. COVERAGE OF OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

    (a) Covered Outpatient Drugs as Medical and Other Health 
Services.--Section 1861(s)(2)(J) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(J)) is amended 
to read as follows:
            ``(J) covered outpatient drugs;''.
    (b) Definition of Covered Outpatient Drug.--Section 1861(t) (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(t)) is amended--
            (1) in the heading, by adding at the end the following: ``; 
        Covered Outpatient Drugs'';
            (2) in paragraph (1)--
                    (A) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting 
                ``the succeeding paragraphs of this subsection'', and
                    (B) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
                ``, but only if used for a medically accepted 
                indication.''; and
            (3) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
    ``(2) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3), the term 
`covered outpatient drug' means any of the following products used for 
a medically accepted indication:
            ``(A) A drug which may be dispensed only upon prescription 
        and--
                    ``(i) which is approved for safety and 
                effectiveness as a prescription drug under section 505 
                or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or 
                which is approved under section 505(j) of such Act;
                    ``(ii)(I) which was commercially used or sold in 
                the United States before the date of the enactment of 
                the Drug Amendments of 1962 or which is identical, 
                similar, or related (within the meaning of section 
                310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal 
                Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) which has not 
                been the subject of a final determination by the 
                Secretary that it is a `new drug' (within the meaning 
                of section 201(p) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
                Cosmetic Act) or an action brought by the Secretary 
                under section 301, 302(a), or 304(a) of such Act to 
                enforce section 502(f) or 505(a) of such Act; or
                    ``(iii)(I) which is described in section 107(c)(3) 
                of the Drug Amendments of 1962 and for which the 
                Secretary has determined there is a compelling 
                justification for its medical need, or is identical, 
                similar, or related (within the meaning of section 
                310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal 
                Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) for which the 
                Secretary has not issued a notice of an opportunity for 
                a hearing under section 505(e) of the Federal Food, 
                Drug, and Cosmetic Act on a proposed order of the 
                Secretary to withdraw approval of an application for 
                such drug under such section because the Secretary has 
                determined that the drug is less than effective for all 
                conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested 
                in its labeling.
            ``(B) A biological product which--
                    ``(i) may only be dispensed upon prescription,
                    ``(ii) is licensed under section 351 of the Public 
                Health Service Act, and
                    ``(iii) is produced at an establishment licensed 
                under such section to produce such product.
            ``(C) Insulin certified under section 506 of the Federal 
        Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
            ``(D) Enteral nutrients (but only if provided as a covered 
        home infusion drug).
    ``(3) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any 
product--
            ``(A) which is administered through infusion in a setting 
        described in paragraph (5)(A)(ii) unless the product is a 
        covered home infusion drug;
            ``(B) when furnished as part of, or as incident to, any 
        other item or service for which payment may be made under this 
        title (other than physicians' services or services which would 
        be physicians' services if furnished by a physician); or
            ``(C) which is listed under paragraph (2) of section 
        1927(d) (other than subparagraph (I) or (J) of such paragraph) 
        as a drug which may be excluded from coverage under a State 
        plan under title XIX and which the Secretary elects to exclude 
        from coverage under part B.
    ``(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term `medically accepted 
indication', with respect to the use of an outpatient drug, includes 
any use which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for 
the drug, and includes another use of the drug if--
            ``(A) the drug has been approved by the Food and Drug 
        Administration; and
            ``(B)(i) such use is supported by one or more citations 
        which are included (or approved for inclusion) in one or more 
        of the following compendia: the American Hospital Formulary 
        Service-Drug Information, the American Medical Association Drug 
        Evaluations, the United States Pharmacopoeia-Drug Information, 
        and other authoritative compendia as identified by the 
        Secretary, unless the Secretary has determined that the use is 
        not medically appropriate or the use is identified as not 
        indicated in one or more such compendia, or
            ``(ii) the carrier involved determines, based upon guidance 
        provided by the Secretary to carriers for determining accepted 
        uses of drugs, that such use is medically accepted based on 
        supportive clinical evidence in peer reviewed medical 
        literature appearing in publications which have been identified 
        for purposes of this clause by the Secretary.
The Secretary may revise the list of compendia in subparagraph (B)(i) 
designated as appropriate for identifying medically accepted 
indications for drugs.
    ``(5)(A) For purposes of this subsection, the term `covered home 
infusion drug' means a covered outpatient drug dispensed to an 
individual that--
            ``(i) is administered intravenously, subcutaneously, or 
        epidurally, using an access device that is inserted into the 
        body and an infusion device to control the rate of flow of the 
        drug (or through other means of administration determined by 
        the Secretary);
            ``(ii) is administered--
                    ``(I) in the individual's home,
                    ``(II) in an institution used as the individual's 
                home, but only if the drug is administered during an 
                inpatient day for which payment is not made to the 
                institution under part A for inpatient or extended care 
                services furnished to the individual, or
                    ``(III) in a facility other than the individual's 
                home if the administration of the drug at the facility 
                is determined by the Secretary to be cost-effective (in 
                accordance with such criteria as the Secretary may 
                establish); and
            ``(iii) with respect to a drug furnished in a home 
        setting--
                    ``(I) is an antibiotic drug and the Secretary has 
                not determined, for the specific drug or the indication 
                to which the drug is applied, that the drug cannot 
                generally be administered safely and effectively in 
                such a setting, or
                    ``(II) is not an antibiotic drug and the Secretary 
                has determined, for the specific drug or the indication 
                to which the drug is applied, that the drug can 
                generally be administered safely and effectively in 
                such a setting.
    ``(B) Not later than January 1, 1999, (and periodically 
thereafter), the Secretary shall publish a list of the drugs, and 
indications for such drugs, that are covered home infusion drugs, with 
respect to which home infusion drug therapy may be provided under this 
title.''.
    (c) Conforming Amendments Repealing Separate Coverage of Certain 
Drugs and Products.--(1) Effective January 1, 1999, section 1861(s)(2) 
(42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)) is amended--
            (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``(including drugs'' 
        and all that follows through ``self-administered)'';
            (B) by striking subparagraphs (G) and (I);
            (C) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (M); and
            (D) by striking subparagraphs (O), (P), and (Q).
    (2) Effective January 1, 1999, section 1861 (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is 
amended by striking the subsection (jj) added by section 4156(a)(2) of 
OBRA-1990.
    (3) Effective January 1, 1999, section 1881(b) (42 U.S.C. 
1395rr(b)) is amended--
            (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (1)--
                    (i) by striking ``, (B)'' and inserting ``, and 
                (B)'', and
                    (ii) by striking ``, and (C)'' and all that follows 
                and inserting a period; and
            (B) in paragraph (11)--
                    (i) by striking ``(11)(A)'' and inserting ``(11)'', 
                and
                    (ii) by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C).

SEC. 2002. PAYMENT RULES AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED 
              OUTPATIENT DRUGS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1834 (42 U.S.C. 1395m) is amended by 
inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection:
    ``(d) Payment for and Certain Requirements Concerning Covered 
Outpatient Drugs.--
            ``(1) Deductible.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Payment shall be made under 
                paragraph (2) only for expenses incurred by an 
                individual for a covered outpatient drug during a 
                calendar year after the individual has incurred 
                expenses in the year for such drugs (during a period in 
                which the individual is entitled to benefits under this 
                part) equal to the deductible amount for that year.
                    ``(B) Deductible amount.--
                            ``(i) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the 
                        deductible amount is--
                                    ``(I) for 1999, an amount equal to 
                                the amount determined under clause 
                                (ii)(I);
                                    ``(II) for 2000, the amount 
                                (rounded to the nearest dollar) that 
                                the Secretary estimates will ensure 
                                that the percentage of individuals 
                                covered under this part (other than 
                                individuals enrolled with an eligible 
                                organization under section 1876, an 
                                organization described in section 
                                1833(a)(1)(A), or a medicare drug 
                                benefit plan under section 1851) during 
                                the year who will incur expenses for 
                                covered outpatient drugs equal to or 
                                greater than such amount will be the 
                                same as the percentage for the previous 
                                year;
                                    ``(III) for 2001, an amount equal 
                                to the amount determined under clause 
                                (ii)(II); and
                                    ``(IV) for any succeeding year, the 
                                amount (rounded to the nearest dollar) 
                                that the Secretary estimates will 
                                ensure that the percentage of 
                                individuals covered under this part 
                                (other than individuals enrolled with 
                                an eligible organization under section 
                                1876, an organization described in 
                                section 1833(a)(1)(A), or a medicare 
                                drug benefit plan under section 1851) 
                                during the year who will incur expenses 
                                for covered outpatient drugs equal to 
                                or greater than such amount will be the 
                                same as the percentage for the previous 
                                year.
                            ``(ii) For purposes of clause (i), the 
                        amount determined under this clause is--
                                    ``(I) in 1999, an amount determined 
                                by the Secretary such that the amount 
                                so determined will result in projected 
                                incurred spending and administrative 
                                costs (net of projected rebates under 
                                section 1851 and any portion of the 
                                part B premium attributable to the 
                                covered outpatient drug benefit) for 
                                providing payment under this title for 
                                covered outpatient drugs that would be 
                                equal to a spending target equal to 
                                $13,500,000,000; and
                                    ``(II) in 2001, an amount 
                                determined by the Secretary (based on 
                                actual experience) that the Secretary 
                                estimates will ensure that the 
                                percentage of individuals covered under 
                                this part (other than individuals 
                                enrolled with an eligible organization 
                                under section 1876, an organization 
                                described in section 1833(a)(1)(A), or 
                                a medicare drug benefit plan under 
                                section 1851) during the year who will 
                                incur expenses for covered outpatient 
                                drugs equal to or greater than such 
                                amount will be the same as the 
                                percentage that would have incurred 
                                such expenses had actual experience in 
                                such incurred spending and 
                                administrative costs (described in 
                                subclause (I)) for 1999 been equal to 
                                the spending target for 1999 (described 
                                in subclause (I)).
                            ``(iii) The Secretary shall promulgate the 
                        deductible amount for 1999 and each succeeding 
                        year not later than October 1 of the previous 
                        year.
            ``(2) Payment amount.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Subject to the deductible 
                established under paragraph (1), the amount payable 
                under this part for a covered outpatient drug furnished 
                to an individual during a calendar year shall be equal 
                to--
                            ``(i) 80 percent of the payment basis 
                        described in paragraph (3), in the case of an 
                        individual who has not incurred expenses for 
                        covered outpatient drugs during the year 
                        (including the deductible imposed under 
                        paragraph (1)) in excess of the out-of-pocket 
                        limit for the year under subparagraph (B); and
                            ``(ii) 100 percent of the payment basis 
                        described in paragraph (3), in the case of any 
                        other individual.
                    ``(B) Out-of-pocket limit described.--
                            ``(i) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the 
                        out-of-pocket limit for a year is equal to--
                                    ``(I) for 1999, $1275; and
                                    ``(II) for any succeeding year, the 
                                amount (rounded to the nearest dollar) 
                                that the Secretary estimates will 
                                ensure that the percentage of the 
                                average number of individuals covered 
                                under this part (other than individuals 
                                enrolled with an eligible organization 
                                under section 1876 or an organization 
                                described in section 1833(a)(1)(A)) 
                                during the year who will incur expenses 
                                for covered outpatient drugs equal to 
                                or greater than such amount will be the 
                                same as the percentage for the previous 
                                year.
                            ``(ii) The Secretary shall promulgate the 
                        out-of-pocket limit for 1999 and each 
                        succeeding year not later than October 1 of the 
                        previous year.
            ``(3) Payment basis.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the 
        payment basis is the lesser of--
                    ``(A) the actual charge for a covered outpatient 
                drug, or
                    ``(B) the applicable payment limit established 
                under paragraph (4).
            ``(4) Payment limits.--
                    ``(A) Payment limit for single source drugs and 
                multiple source drugs with restrictive prescriptions.--
                In the case of a covered outpatient drug that is a 
                multiple source drug which has a restrictive 
                prescription, or that is single source drug, the 
                payment limit for a payment calculation period is equal 
                to the amount of the administrative allowance 
                (established under paragraph (5)) plus the product of 
                the number of dosage units dispensed and the per unit 
                estimated acquisition cost for the drug product 
                (determined under subparagraph (C)) for the period.
                    ``(B) Payment limit for multiple source drugs 
                without restrictive prescriptions.--In the case of a 
                drug that is a multiple source drug which does not have 
                a restrictive prescription, the payment limit for a 
                payment calculation period is equal to the amount of 
                the administrative allowance (established under 
                paragraph (5)) plus the product of the number of dosage 
                units dispensed and the unweighted median of the unit 
                estimated acquisition cost (determined under 
                subparagraph (C)) for the drug products for the period.
                    ``(C) Determination of unit price.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
                        determine, for the dispensing or providing of a 
                        covered outpatient drug product in the payment 
                        calculation period, the estimated acquisition 
                        cost for the drug product. With respect to any 
                        covered outpatient drug product, the estimated 
                        acquisition cost, may not exceed 93 percent of 
                        the published average wholesale price for the 
                        drug, as determined one month prior to the 
                        beginning of the payment calculation period.
                            ``(ii) Compliance with request for 
                        information.--If a wholesaler or direct seller 
                        of a covered outpatient drug refuses, after 
                        being requested by the Secretary, to provide 
                        price information requested to carry out clause 
                        (i), or deliberately provides information that 
                        is false, the Secretary may impose a civil 
                        money penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each 
                        such refusal or provision of false information. 
                        The provisions of section 1128A (other than 
                        subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil 
                        money penalties under the previous sentence in 
                        the same manner as they apply to a penalty or 
                        proceeding under section 1128A(a). Information 
                        gathered pursuant to clause (i) shall not be 
                        disclosed except as the Secretary determines to 
                        be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
                        part and to permit the Comptroller General and 
                        the Director of the Congressional Budget Office 
                        to review the information provided.
            ``(5) Administrative allowance for purposes of payment 
        limit.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
                subparagraphs (B) and (C), the administrative allowance 
                established under this paragraph is--
                            ``(i) for 1999, an amount equal to $5; and
                            ``(ii) for each succeeding year, the amount 
                        for the previous year, adjusted by the 
                        percentage change in the consumer price index 
                        for all urban consumers (U.S. city average) for 
                        the 12-month period ending with June of that 
                        previous year.
                    ``(B) No dispensing fee for certain drugs and 
                products.--No administrative allowance may be provided 
                under this paragraph with respect to any of the 
                following covered outpatient drugs:
                            ``(i) Erythropoietin provided to dialysis 
                        patients.
                            ``(ii) Drugs and biologicals provided as an 
                        incident to a physician's service or to a 
                        service which would be a physician's service if 
                        furnished by a physician.
                            ``(iii) Covered home infusion drugs.
            ``(6) Mail order pharmacy option.--
                    ``(A) Establishment of mail order option.--The 
                Secretary may establish a competitive bidding process 
                to award contracts to mail order pharmacies for the 
                provision of covered outpatient drugs that are 
                maintenance drugs to individuals who opt to receive 
                such drugs through the mail order pharmacies. The 
                payment amount for a covered outpatient drug under this 
                section to a mail order pharmacy under such a contract 
                shall be equal to the amount bid by such plan under 
                this subparagraph instead of the payment limit 
                determined in accordance with paragraph (4).
                    ``(B) Sharing of savings.--To the extent that 
                payment is made under this section for maintenance 
                drugs that are provided through a mail order pharmacy 
                pursuant to subparagraph (A), an individual that opts 
                to receive such drugs from such pharmacy shall receive 
                from the Secretary a rebate or a contribution toward 
                the individual's cost sharing in an amount equal to 25 
                percent of the excess of the payment limit determined 
                in accordance with paragraph (4) over the amount 
                charged by the mail order pharmacy for such drug.
            ``(7) Assuring appropriate prescribing and dispensing 
        practices.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop a 
                program to--
                            ``(i) provide on-line prospective review of 
                        prescriptions on a 24-hour basis (in accordance 
                        with subparagraph (B)) and retrospective review 
                        of claims;
                            ``(ii) establish standards for counseling 
                        individuals to whom covered outpatient drugs 
                        are prescribed; and
                            ``(iii) identify (and to educate 
                        physicians, patients, and pharmacists 
                        concerning)--
                                    ``(I) instances or patterns of 
                                unnecessary or inappropriate 
                                prescribing or dispensing practices for 
                                covered outpatient drugs,
                                    ``(II) instances or patterns of 
                                substandard care with respect to such 
                                drugs,
                                    ``(III) potential adverse 
                                reactions, and
                                    ``(IV) appropriate use of generic 
                                products.
                    ``(B) Prospective review.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The program under this 
                        paragraph shall provide for on-line prospective 
                        review of each covered outpatient drug 
                        prescribed for a patient before the 
                        prescription is filled or the drug is 
                        furnished, including screening for potential 
                        drug therapy problems due to therapeutic 
                        duplication, drug-to-drug interactions, and 
                        incorrect drug dosage or duration of drug 
                        treatment.
                            ``(ii) Discussion of appropriate use.--In 
                        conducting prospective review under this 
                        subparagraph, any individual or entity that 
                        dispenses a covered outpatient drug shall offer 
                        to discuss with the patient to whom the drug is 
                        furnished or the patient's caregiver (in person 
                        if practicable, or through access to a toll-
                        free telephone service) information regarding 
                        the appropriate use of the drug, potential 
                        interactions between the drug and other drugs 
                        dispensed to the individual, and such other 
                        matters as the Secretary may require.
                            ``(iii) Additional duties.--In carrying out 
                        this subparagraph, the Secretary shall--
                                    ``(I) develop public domain 
                                software which could be used by 
                                carriers and pharmacies to provide the 
                                on-line prospective review; and
                                    ``(II) study the feasibility and 
                                desirability of requiring patient 
                                diagnosis codes on prescriptions and to 
                                the extent that the Secretary finds 
                                such a requirement to be feasible and 
                                desirable, to implement such a 
                                requirement to be effective on and 
                                after January 1, 2000.
                    ``(C) Prior authorization.--
                            ``(i) Development of list of misused 
                        drugs.--The Secretary shall develop (and 
                        periodically) update a list of covered 
                        outpatient drugs which the Secretary has 
                        determined, based on data collected, may be 
                        subject to misuse or inappropriate use. The 
                        Secretary shall provide a means for 
                        manufacturers to appeal an initial decision to 
                        include a drug on the list.
                            ``(ii) Prior authorization for drugs on 
                        list.--The Secretary shall establish a process 
                        under which (subject to clause (iii)) the 
                        Secretary may require advance approval for any 
                        covered outpatient drug included on the list 
                        developed under clause (i).
                            ``(iii) Restrictions on denial of 
                        approval.--The Secretary may not deny the 
                        approval of a drug under the process 
                        established under clause (ii) before its 
                        dispensing unless the process--
                                    ``(I) provides responses by 
                                telephone or other telecommunication 
                                device within 24 hours of a request for 
                                prior authorization; and
                                    ``(II) provides for the dispensing 
                                of at least a 72-hour supply of a 
                                covered outpatient prescription drug in 
                                emergency situations (as defined by the 
                                Secretary).
                            ``(iv) Expansion to other drugs.--If the 
                        rate of growth of payments under this part for 
                        covered outpatient drugs exceeds the average 
                        rate of growth for parts A and B expenditures 
                        and the Secretary finds such action to be 
                        feasible and desirable, the Secretary may 
                        require advance approval under this 
                        subparagraph for the dispensing of a covered 
                        outpatient drug in cases where a more cost-
                        effective therapeutically or generically 
                        equivalent drug is available.
                    ``(D) Drug use review.--As part of the program 
                established under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall 
                provide for a drug use review program to provide for 
                the ongoing periodic examination of claims data and 
                other records on covered outpatient drugs furnished to 
                patients under this title in order to identify patterns 
                of fraud, abuse, gross overuse, or inappropriate or 
                medically unnecessary care among physicians, 
                pharmacists, and patients.
                    ``(E) Adoption of medicaid programs.--To the extent 
                considered appropriate by the Secretary, the program 
                developed under this paragraph with respect to drugs 
                furnished in a State may include elements applicable to 
                the furnishing of covered outpatient drugs under the 
                State medicaid program under section 1927.
            ``(8) Billing requirements.--
                    ``(A) Mandatory assignment.--(i) Payment under this 
                part for a covered outpatient drug may only be made on 
                an assignment-related basis.
                    ``(ii) Except for deductible, coinsurance, or 
                copayment amounts applicable under this part, no person 
                may bill or collect any amount from an individual 
                enrolled under this part or other person for a covered 
                outpatient drug for which payment may be made under 
                this part, and no such individual or person is liable 
                for payment of any amounts billed in violation of this 
                clause. If a person knowingly and willfully bills or 
                collects an amount in violation of the previous 
                sentence, the Secretary may apply sanctions against 
                such person in accordance with section 1842(j)(2). 
                Paragraph (4) of section 1842(j) shall apply in this 
                clause in the same manner as such paragraph applies to 
                such section.
                    ``(B) Use of electronic system.--The Secretary 
                shall establish, by not later than January 1, 1998, a 
                point-of-sale electronic system for use by carriers and 
                pharmacies in the submission of information respecting 
                covered outpatient drugs dispensed to medicare 
                beneficiaries under this part. Such system shall be 
                consistent with the standards established by the 
                National Council of Prescription Drug Programs.
            ``(9) Requiring pharmacy supplier numbers.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Payment may not be made under 
                this part with respect to a covered outpatient drug 
                dispensed by a pharmacy unless the entity has obtained 
                a supplier number from the Secretary.
                    ``(B) Standards for issuing supplier numbers.--The 
                Secretary may not issue a supplier number to an entity 
                for purposes of subparagraph (A) unless the entity 
                demonstrates to the Secretary that it will maintain 
                patient records (in accordance with such standards as 
                the Secretary may impose) and meet the other applicable 
                requirements of this subsection and section 1848(g).
            ``(10) Study on pharmaceutical care services.--The 
        Secretary shall conduct a study to develop, in consultation 
        with actively practicing pharmacists, a payment methodology (to 
        be in addition to the administrative allowance established 
        under paragraph (5)) which is based upon and reflects the 
        reasonable charges for varying levels of pharmacist services, 
        including patient consultations provided to individuals under 
        this section. The Secretary shall submit a report, including 
        such recommendations as the Secretary determines to be 
        appropriate, to Congress on the methodology developed under 
        this paragraph not later than September 30, 1998.
            ``(11) Definitions.--In this subsection:
                    ``(A) Multiple and single source drugs.--The terms 
                `multiple source drug' and `single source drug' have 
                the meanings given those terms under section 
                1927(k)(7), except that the reference in such section 
                to a `covered outpatient drug' shall be considered a 
                reference to a covered outpatient drug under this part.
                    ``(B) Restrictive prescription.--A drug has a 
                `restrictive prescription' only if--
                            ``(i) in the case of a written 
                        prescription, the prescription for the drug 
                        indicates, in the handwriting of the physician 
                        or other person prescribing the drug and with 
                        an appropriate phrase (such as `brand medically 
                        necessary') recognized by the Secretary, that a 
                        particular drug product must be dispensed, or
                            ``(ii) in the case of a prescription issued 
                        by telephone--
                                    ``(I) the physician or other person 
                                prescribing the drug (through use of 
                                such an appropriate phrase) states that 
                                a particular drug product must be 
                                dispensed, and
                                    ``(II) the physician or other 
                                person submits to the pharmacy 
                                involved, within 30 days after the date 
                                of the telephone prescription, a 
                                written confirmation which is in the 
                                handwriting of the physician or other 
                                person prescribing the drug and which 
                                indicates with such appropriate phrase 
                                that the particular drug product was 
                                required to have been dispensed.
                    ``(C) Payment calculation period.--The term 
                `payment calculation period' means a calendar year.''.
    (b) Requiring Pharmacies to Submit Claims.--Section 1848(g)(4) (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-4(g)(4)) is amended--
            (1) in the heading--
                    (A) by striking ``Physician'', and
                    (B) by inserting ``by physicians and suppliers'' 
                after ``claims'';
            (2) in the matter in subparagraph (A) preceding clause 
        (i)--
                    (A) by striking ``For services furnished on or 
                after September 1, 1990, within 1 year'' and inserting 
                ``Within 1 year (or 90 days in the case of covered 
                outpatient drugs)'',
                    (B) by striking ``a service'' and inserting ``an 
                item or service'', and
                    (C) by inserting ``or of providing a covered 
                outpatient drug,'' after ``basis,''; and
            (3) in subparagraph (A)(i), by inserting ``item or'' before 
        ``service''.
    (c) Special Rules for Carriers.--
            (1) Use of regional carriers.--Section 1842(b)(2) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395u(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following:
    ``(D) With respect to activities related to covered outpatient 
drugs, the Secretary may enter into contracts with carriers under this 
section to perform the activities on a regional basis.''.
            (2) Additional functions.--Section 1842(b)(3) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395u(b)(3)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
                (H);
                    (B) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
                (L);
                    (C) by redesignating subparagraph (L) as 
                subparagraph (I); and
                    (D) by inserting after subparagraph (I) (as so 
                redesignated) the following new subparagraphs:
            ``(J) if it makes determinations or payments with respect 
        to covered outpatient drugs, will--
                    ``(i) receive information transmitted under the 
                electronic system established under section 
                1834(d)(8)(B), and
                    ``(ii) respond to requests by pharmacies (and 
                individuals entitled to benefits under this part) as to 
                whether or not such an individual has met the 
                prescription drug deductible established under section 
                1834(d)(1)(A) for a year; and
            ``(K) will enter into such contracts with organizations 
        described in subsection (f)(3) as the Secretary determines may 
        be necessary to implement and operate (and for related 
        functions with respect to) the electronic system established 
        under section 1834(d)(8)(B) for covered outpatient drugs under 
        this part;''.
            (3) Payment on other than a cost basis.--Section 
        1842(c)(1)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c)(1)(A)) is amended--
                    (A) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(c)(1)(A)'',
                    (B) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, except 
                as otherwise provided in clause (ii),'' after ``under 
                this part, and'', and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(ii) To the extent that a contract under this section provides 
for activities related to covered outpatient drugs, the Secretary may 
provide for payment for those activities based on any method of payment 
determined by the Secretary to be appropriate.''.
            (4) Batch prompt processing of claims.--Section 1842(c) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395u(c)) is amended--
                    (A) in paragraphs (2)(A) and (3)(A), by striking 
                ``Each'' and inserting ``Except as provided in 
                paragraph (4), each'';
                    (B) by adding at the end the following new 
                paragraph:
    ``(4)(A) Each contract under this section which provides for the 
disbursement of funds, as described in subsection (a)(1)(B), with 
respect to claims for payment for covered outpatient drugs shall 
provide for a payment cycle under which each carrier will, on a monthly 
basis, make a payment with respect to all claims which were received 
and approved for payment in the period since the most recent date on 
which such a payment was made with respect to the participating 
pharmacy or individual submitting the claim.
    ``(B) If payment is not issued, mailed, or otherwise transmitted 
within 5 days of when such a payment is required to be made under 
subparagraph (A), interest shall be paid at the rate used for purposes 
of section 3902(a) of title 31, United States Code (relating to 
interest penalties for failure to make prompt payments) for the period 
beginning on the day after such 5-day period and ending on the date on 
which payment is made.''.
            (5) Use of other entities for covered outpatient drugs.--
        Section 1842(f) (42 U.S.C. 1395u(f)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
                (1),
                    (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
                (2) and inserting ``; and'', and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(3) with respect to activities related to covered 
        outpatient drugs, any other private entity which the Secretary 
        determines is qualified to conduct such activities.''.
            (6) Designated carriers to process claims of railroad 
        retirees.--Section 1842(g) (42 U.S.C. 1395u(g)) is amended by 
        inserting ``(other than functions related to covered outpatient 
        drugs)'' after ``functions''.
    (e) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1)(A) Section 1833(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is 
        amended--
                    (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (O), 
                and
                    (ii) by inserting before the semicolon at the end 
                the following: ``, and (Q) with respect to covered 
                outpatient drugs, the amounts paid shall be as 
                prescribed by section 1834(d)''.
            (B) Section 1833(a)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(2)) is amended 
        in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by inserting ``, 
        except for covered outpatient drugs,'' after ``and (I) of such 
        section''.
            (2) Section 1833(b)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(b)(2)) is amended 
        by inserting ``or with respect to covered outpatient drugs'' 
        before the comma.
            (3) The first sentence of section 1842(h)(2) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395u(h)(2)) is amended by inserting ``(other than a carrier 
        described in subsection (f)(3))'' after ``Each carrier''.
            (4) The first sentence of section 1866(a)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is amended--
                    (A) in clause (i), by inserting ``section 
                1834(d),'' after ``section 1833(b),'', and
                    (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``, other than for 
                covered outpatient drugs,'' after ``provider)''.

SEC. 2003. MEDICARE REBATES FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS.

    (a) In General.--Part B of title XVIII is amended by adding at the 
end the following new section:

                 ``rebates for covered outpatient drugs

    ``Sec. 1850. (a) Requirement for Rebate Agreement.--In order for 
payment to be available under this part for covered outpatient drugs of 
a manufacturer dispensed or provided on or after January 1, 1999, the 
manufacturer must have entered into and have in effect a rebate 
agreement with the Secretary meeting the requirements of subsection 
(b), and an agreement to give equal access to discounts in accordance 
with subsection (e).
    ``(b) Terms, Implementation, and Enforcement of Rebate Agreement.--
            ``(1) Periodic rebates.--
                    ``(A) In general.--A rebate agreement under this 
                section shall require the manufacturer to pay to the 
                Secretary for each calendar quarter, not later than 30 
                days after the date of receipt of the information 
                described in paragraph (2) for such quarter, a rebate 
                in an amount determined under subsection (c) for all 
                covered outpatient drugs of the manufacturer described 
                in subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Drugs included in quarterly rebate 
                calculation.--Drugs subject to rebate with respect to a 
                calendar quarter are drugs which are dispensed or 
                provided during such quarter to individuals (other than 
                individuals enrolled with an entity with a contract 
                under section 1876 or a medicare drug benefit plan with 
                a contract under section 1851) eligible for benefits 
                under this part, as reported to the Secretary.
            ``(2) Information furnished to manufacturers.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall report to 
                each manufacturer, not later than 60 days after the end 
                of each calendar quarter, information on the total 
                number, for each covered outpatient drug, of units of 
                each dosage form, strength, and package size dispensed 
                or provided under the plan during the quarter, on the 
                basis of the data reported to the Secretary described 
                in paragraph (1)(B).
                    ``(B) Audit.--The Comptroller General may audit the 
                records of the Secretary to the extent necessary to 
                determine the accuracy of reports by the Secretary 
                pursuant to subparagraph (A). Adjustments to rebates 
                shall be made to the extent determined necessary by the 
                audit to reflect actual units of drugs dispensed.
            ``(3) Provision of price information by manufacturer.--
                    ``(A) Quarterly pricing information.--Each 
                manufacturer with an agreement in effect under this 
                section shall report to the Secretary, not later than 
                30 days after the last day of each calendar quarter, on 
                the average manufacturer retail price and the average 
                manufacturer non-retail price for each dosage form and 
                strength of each covered outpatient drug for the 
                quarter.
                    ``(B) Base quarter prices.--Each manufacturer of a 
                covered outpatient drug with an agreement under this 
                section shall report to the Secretary, by not later 
                than 30 days after the effective date of such agreement 
                (or, if later, 30 days after the end of the base 
                quarter), the average manufacturer retail price, for 
                such base quarter, for each dosage form and strength of 
                each such covered drug.
                    ``(C) Verification of average manufacturer price.--
                The Secretary may inspect the records of manufacturers, 
                and survey wholesalers, pharmacies, and institutional 
                purchasers of drugs, as necessary to verify prices 
                reported under subparagraph (A).
                    ``(D) Penalties.--
                            ``(i) Civil money penalties.--The Secretary 
                        may impose a civil money penalty on a 
                        manufacturer with an agreement under this 
                        section--
                                    ``(I) for failure to provide 
                                information required under subparagraph 
                                (A) on a timely basis, in an amount up 
                                to $10,000 per day of delay;
                                    ``(II) for refusal to provide 
                                information about charges or prices 
                                requested by the Secretary for purposes 
                                of verification pursuant to 
                                subparagraph (C), in an amount up to 
                                $100,000; and
                                    ``(III) for provision, pursuant to 
                                subparagraph (A) or (B), of information 
                                that the manufacturer knows or should 
                                know is false, in an amount up to 
                                $100,000 per item of information.
                        Such civil money penalties are in addition to 
                        any other penalties prescribed by law. The 
                        provisions of section 1128A (other than 
                        subsections (a) (with respect to amounts of 
                        penalties or additional assessments) and (b)) 
                        shall apply to a civil money penalty under this 
                        subparagraph in the same manner as such 
                        provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
                        under section 1128A(a).
                            ``(ii) Termination of agreement.--If a 
                        manufacturer with an agreement under this 
                        section has not provided information required 
                        under subparagraph (A) or (B) within 90 days of 
                        the deadline imposed, the Secretary may suspend 
                        the agreement with respect to covered 
                        outpatient drugs dispensed after the end of 
                        such 90-day period and until the date such 
                        information is reported (but in no case shall a 
                        suspension be for less than 30 days).
            ``(4) Length of agreement.--
                    ``(A) In general.--A rebate agreement shall be 
                effective for an initial period of not less than one 
                year and shall be automatically renewed for a period of 
                not less than one year unless terminated under 
                subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Termination.--
                            ``(i) By the secretary.--The Secretary may 
                        provide for termination of a rebate agreement 
                        for violation of the requirements of the 
                        agreement or other good cause shown. Such 
                        termination shall not be effective earlier than 
                        60 days after the date of notice of such 
                        termination. The Secretary shall afford a 
                        manufacturer an opportunity for a hearing 
                        concerning such termination, but such hearing 
                        shall not delay the effective date of the 
                        termination.
                            ``(ii) By a manufacturer.--A manufacturer 
                        may terminate a rebate agreement under this 
                        section for any reason. Any such termination 
                        shall not be effective until the calendar 
                        quarter beginning at least 60 days after the 
                        date the manufacturer provides notice to the 
                        Secretary.
                            ``(iii) Effective date of termination.--Any 
                        termination under this subparagraph shall not 
                        affect rebates due under the agreement before 
                        the effective date of its termination.
                            ``(iv) Notice to pharmacies.--In the case 
                        of a termination under this subparagraph, the 
                        Secretary shall notify pharmacies and physician 
                        organizations not less than 30 days before the 
                        effective date of such termination.
    ``(c) Amount of Rebate.--
            ``(1) Base rebate.--Each manufacturer shall remit a basic 
        rebate to the Secretary for each calendar quarter in an amount, 
        with respect to each dosage form and strength of a covered 
        outpatient drug, equal to the product of--
                    ``(A) the total number of units subject to rebate 
                for such quarter, as described in subsection (b)(1)(B); 
                and
                    ``(B)(i) in the case of a single-source drug or 
                innovator-multiple source drug, 15 percent of the 
                average manufacturer retail price, or
                    ``(ii) in the case of a noninnovator-multiple 
                source drug furnished over-the-counter, insulin or an 
                enteral nutrient, 6 percent (or the applicable percent 
                if the Secretary implements the sliding scale developed 
                in accordance with paragraph (4)) of the average 
                manufacturer retail price.
            ``(2) Additional rebate.--Each manufacturer shall remit to 
        the Secretary, for each calendar quarter, an additional rebate 
        for each dosage form and strength of a single-source or 
        innovator-multiple-source drug, in an amount equal to--
                    ``(A) the total number of units subject to rebate 
                for such quarter, as described in subsection (b)(1)(B), 
                multiplied by
                    ``(B) the amount, if any, by which the average 
                manufacturer retail price for such drugs of the 
                manufacturer exceeds the average manufacturer retail 
                price for the base quarter, increased by the percentage 
                increase in the Consumer Price Index for all urban 
                consumers (U.S. average) from the end of such base 
                quarter to the month before the beginning of such 
                calendar quarter.
            ``(3) Deposit of rebates.--The Secretary shall deposit 
        rebates under this section in the Federal Supplementary Medical 
        Insurance Trust Fund established under section 1841.
            ``(4) Applicable percent.--
                    ``(A) Noninnovator multiple source drug.--
                            ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this 
                        subparagraph, the Secretary may develop and 
                        implement a sliding scale to determine the 
                        applicable percent for rebates based on the 
                        relationship between the average manufacturer 
                        retail price of the noninnovator-multiple 
                        source drug furnished over-the-counter and the 
                        average manufacturer retail price of the 
                        equivalent innovator drug (except as provided 
                        in subparagraph (B)) .
                            ``(ii) Sliding scale described.--The 
                        sliding scale developed by the Secretary under 
                        clause (i) shall--
                                    ``(I) require that the applicable 
                                percent be not less than 2 percent and 
                                not be greater than 15 percent; and
                                    ``(II) ensure that the total level 
                                of rebates collected under such a 
                                sliding scale would be equivalent to a 
                                flat 6 percent rebate on such drugs.
                    ``(B) Enteral nutrients and insulin.--For purposes 
                of this subparagraph, the applicable percent for 
                enteral nutrients and insulin under the sliding scale 
                would be equal to 6 percent.
    ``(d) Confidentiality of Information.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, information disclosed by a manufacturer under this 
section is confidential and shall not be disclosed by the Secretary (or 
a carrier), except--
            ``(A) as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry 
        out this section,
            ``(B) to permit the Comptroller General to review the 
        information provided, and
            ``(C) to permit the Director of the Congressional Budget 
        Office to review the information provided.
    ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Average manufacturer retail price.--The term `average 
        manufacturer retail price' means, with respect to a covered 
        outpatient drug of a manufacturer for a calendar quarter, the 
        average price (inclusive of discounts for cash payment, prompt 
        payment, volume purchases, and rebates (other than rebates 
        under this section), but exclusive of nominal prices) paid to 
        the manufacturer for the drug in the United States for drugs 
        distributed to the retail pharmacy class of trade.
            ``(2) Average manufacturer non-retail price.--The term 
        `average manufacturer non-retail price' means, with respect to 
        a covered outpatient drug of a manufacturer for a calendar 
        quarter, the weighted average price (inclusive of discounts for 
        cash payment, prompt payment, volume purchases, and rebates 
        (other than rebates under this section), but exclusive of 
        nominal prices) paid to the manufacturer for the drug in the 
        United States by hospitals and other institutional purchasers 
        that purchase drugs for institutional use and not for resale.
            ``(3) Base quarter.--The term `base quarter' means, with 
        respect to a covered outpatient drug of a manufacturer, the 
        calendar quarter beginning April 1, 1993, or (if later) the 
        first full calendar quarter during which the drug was marketed 
        in the United States.
            ``(4) Drug.--The terms `innovator multiple source drug', 
        `noninnovator multiple source drug', and `single source drug' 
        have the meanings given those terms under section 1927(k)(7), 
        except that the reference in such section to a `covered 
        outpatient drug' shall be considered a reference to a covered 
        outpatient drug under this part.
            ``(5) Manufacturer.--The term `manufacturer' means, with 
        respect to a covered outpatient drug--
                    ``(A) the entity whose National Drug Code number 
                (as issued pursuant to section 510(e) of the Federal 
                Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) appears on the labeling 
                of the drug; or
                    ``(B) if the number described in subparagraph (A) 
                does not appear on the labeling of the drug, the person 
                named as the applicant in a human drug application (in 
                the case of a new drug) or the product license 
                application (in the case of a biological product) for 
                such drug approved by the Food and Drug 
                Administration.''.
    (b) Exclusions From Coverage.--Section 1862(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) 
is amended--
            (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (15),
            (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (16) and 
        inserting ``; or'', and
            (3) by inserting after paragraph (16) the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(17) consisting of a covered outpatient drug (as 
        described in section 1861(t)) furnished during a year for which 
        the drug's manufacturer does not have in effect a rebate 
        agreement with the Secretary that meets the requirements of 
        section 1850 for the year.''.

SEC. 2004. PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION.

    Part B of title XVIII is amended by inserting after section 1846 
the following new section:

             ``prescription drug payment review commission

    ``Sec. 1847. (a)(1) The Director of the Congressional Office of 
Technology Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' 
and the `Office', respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a 
Prescription Drug Payment Review Commission (in this section referred 
to as the `Commission'), to be composed of individuals with expertise 
in the provision and financing of covered outpatient drugs appointed by 
the Director (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United 
States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service).
    ``(2) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members of 
the Commission shall first be appointed by no later than January 1, 
1996, for a term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide 
initially for such shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing 
basis) the terms of no more than 4 members expire in any one year.
    ``(3) The membership of the Commission shall include recognized 
experts in the fields of health care economics, medicine, pharmacology, 
pharmacy, and prescription drug reimbursement, as well as at least one 
individual who is a medicare beneficiary, one individual representing a 
research-based pharmaceutical company, and one individual representing 
a biotechnology company.
    ``(b)(1) The Commission shall submit to Congress an annual report 
no later than May 1 of each year, beginning with 1997--
                    ``(A) concerning the implementation and the 
                operation of the coverage of covered outpatient drugs 
                under this part, including recommendations to Congress 
                on changes to the program to improve access to 
                prescription drugs, the quality of prescription drug 
                care, and program efficiencies;
                    ``(B) reviewing the process of contracting with 
                medicare drug benefits plans under section 1851;
                    ``(C) concerning the fiscal soundness of the 
                furnishing of covered outpatient drugs under this part;
                    ``(D) concerning the appropriateness, fairness and 
                effectiveness of the rebate structure under section 
                1850; and
                    ``(E) concerning the advisability of developing a 
                review process to exempt small manufacturers of single 
                source or innovator multiple source drugs from rebates 
                under section 1850 based on the manufacturer's sales 
                and the historic pricing of the manufacturer's 
                products.
    ``(c) Section 1845(c)(1) shall apply to the Commission in the same 
manner as it applies to the Physician Payment Review Commission.
    ``(d) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. Such sums shall 
be payable from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
Fund.''.

SEC. 2005. COVERAGE OF HOME INFUSION DRUG THERAPY SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1832(a)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395k(a)(2)(A)) 
is amended by inserting ``and home infusion drug therapy services'' 
before the semicolon.
    (b) Home Infusion Drug Therapy Services Defined.--Section 1861 (42 
U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
            (1) by redesignating the subsection (jj) inserted by 
        section 4156(a)(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 
        1990 as subsection (kk); and
            (2) by inserting after such subsection the following new 
        subsection:

                 ``Home Infusion Drug Therapy Services

    ``(ll)(1) The term `home infusion drug therapy services' means the 
items and services described in paragraph (2) furnished to an 
individual who is under the care of a physician--
            ``(A) in a setting described in subsection (t)(5)(A)(ii),
            ``(B) by a qualified home infusion drug therapy provider 
        (as defined in paragraph (3)) or by others under arrangements 
        with them made by that provider, and
            ``(C) under a plan established and periodically reviewed by 
        a physician.
    ``(2) The items and services described in this paragraph are such 
nursing, pharmacy, and related services (including medical supplies, 
intravenous fluids, delivery, and equipment) as are necessary to 
conduct safely and effectively a drug regimen through use of a covered 
home infusion drug (as defined in subsection (t)(5)), but do not 
include such covered home infusion drugs.
    ``(3) The term `qualified home infusion drug therapy provider' 
means any entity that the Secretary determines meets the following 
requirements (or, in the case of a home health agency or an entity with 
respect to which the only items and services described in paragraph (2) 
furnished by the entity are enteral nutrition therapy services, meets 
any of the following requirements which the Secretary considers 
appropriate):
            ``(A) The entity is capable of providing nursing or 
        pharmacy services and providing or arranging for the other 
        items and services described in paragraph (2) and covered home 
        infusion drugs.
            ``(B) The entity maintains clinical records on all 
        patients.
            ``(C) The entity adheres to written protocols and policies 
        with respect to the provision of items and services.
            ``(D) The entity makes services available (as needed) seven 
        days a week on a 24-hour basis.
            ``(E) The entity coordinates all services with the 
        patient's physician.
            ``(F) The entity conducts a quality assessment and 
        assurance program, including drug regimen review and 
        coordination of patient care.
            ``(G) The entity assures that only trained personnel 
        provide covered home infusion drugs (and any other service for 
        which training is required to provide the service safely).
            ``(H) The entity assumes responsibility for the quality of 
        services provided by others under arrangements with the entity.
            ``(I) In the case of an entity in any State in which State 
        or applicable local law provides for the licensing of entities 
        of this nature, the entity (i) is licensed pursuant to such 
        law, or (ii) is approved, by the agency of such State or 
        locality responsible for licensing entities of this nature, as 
        meeting the standards established for such licensing.
            ``(J) The entity meets such other requirements as the 
        Secretary may determine are necessary to assure the safe and 
        effective provision of home infusion drug therapy services and 
        the efficient administration of the home infusion drug therapy 
        benefit.''.
    (c) Payment.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1833 (42 U.S.C. 1395l) is 
        amended--
                    (A) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking ``or (E)'' 
                and inserting ``(E), or (F)'',
                    (B) in subsection (a)(2)(D), by striking ``and'' at 
                the end,
                    (C) in subsection (a)(2)(E), by striking the 
                semicolon and inserting ``; and'',
                    (D) by inserting after subsection (a)(2)(E) the 
                following new subparagraph:
                    ``(F) with respect to home infusion drug therapy 
                services, the amounts described in section 1834(j);'', 
                and
                    (E) in the first sentence of subsection (b), by 
                striking ``services, (3)'' and inserting ``services and 
                home infusion drug therapy services, (3)''.
            (2) Amount described.--Section 1834 is amended by adding at 
        the end the following new subsection:
    ``(j) Home Infusion Drug Therapy Services.--
            ``(1) In general.--With respect to home infusion drug 
        therapy services, payment under this part shall be made in an 
        amount equal to the lesser of the actual charges for such 
        services or the fee schedule established under paragraph (2).
            ``(2) Establishment of fee schedule.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish by 
                regulation before the beginning of 1999 and each 
                succeeding year a fee schedule for home infusion drug 
                therapy services for which payment is made under this 
                part. A fee schedule established under this subsection 
                shall be on a per diem basis.
                    ``(B) Adjustment for services furnished by 
                institutions.--The fee schedule established by the 
                Secretary under subparagraph (A) shall provide for 
                adjustments in the case of home infusion drug therapy 
                services for which payment is made under this part that 
                are furnished by a provider of services to avoid 
                duplicative payments under this title for the service 
                costs associated with such services.''.
    (d) Certification.--Section 1835(a)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395n(a)(2)) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E),
            (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F) 
        and inserting ``; and'', and
            (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following:
                    ``(G) in the case of home infusion drug therapy 
                services, (i) such services are or were required 
                because the individual needed such services for the 
                administration of a covered home infusion drug, (ii) a 
                plan for furnishing such services has been established 
                and is reviewed periodically by a physician, and (iii) 
                such services are or were furnished while the 
                individual is or was under the care of a physician.''.
    (e) Certification of Home Infusion Drug Therapy Providers; 
Intermediate Sanctions for Noncompliance.--
            (1) Treatment as provider of services.--Section 1861(u) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is amended by inserting ``home infusion drug 
        therapy provider,'' after ``hospice program,''.
            (2) Consultation with state agencies and other 
        organizations.--Section 1863 (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended by 
        striking ``and (dd)(2)'' and inserting ``(dd)(2), and 
        (ll)(3)''.
            (3) Use of state agencies in determining compliance.--
        Section 1864(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended--
                    (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``an agency 
                is a hospice program'' and inserting ``an agency or 
                entity is a hospice program or a home infusion drug 
                therapy provider,''; and
                    (B) in the second sentence--
                            (i) by striking ``institution or agency'' 
                        and inserting ``institution, agency, or 
                        entity'', and
                            (ii) by striking ``or hospice program'' and 
                        inserting ``hospice program, or home infusion 
                        drug therapy provider''.
            (4) Application of intermediate sanctions.--Section 1846 
        (42 U.S.C. 1395w-2) is amended--
                    (A) in the heading, by adding ``and for qualified 
                home infusion drug therapy providers'' at the end,
                    (B) in subsection (a), by inserting ``or that a 
                qualified home infusion drug therapy provider that is 
                certified for participation under this title no longer 
                substantially meets the requirements of section 
                1861(ll)(3)'' after ``under this part'', and
                    (C) in subsection (b)(2)(A)(iv), by inserting ``or 
                home infusion drug therapy services'' after ``clinical 
                diagnostic laboratory tests''.
    (f) Use of Regional Intermediaries in Administration of Benefit.--
Section 1816 (42 U.S.C. 1395h) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
    ``(k) With respect to carrying out functions relating to payment 
for home infusion drug therapy services and covered home infusion 
drugs, the Secretary may enter into contracts with agencies or 
organizations under this section to perform such functions on a 
regional basis.''.
    (g) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 1834(h)(4)(B) (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(h)(4)(B)) is amended by striking ``, except that'' and all that 
follows through ``equipment''.
    (2) Section 1861(n) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(n)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following: ``Such term does not include any home infusion 
drug therapy services described in section 1861(ll) or any covered 
outpatient drug used as a supply related to the furnishing of an item 
of durable medical equipment.''.
    (3) Section 1861(s)(8) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(8)) is amended by 
inserting after ``dental'' the following: ``devices or enteral and 
parenteral nutrients, supplies, and equipment''.
    (h) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1999.

SEC. 2006. MEDICARE DRUG BENEFIT PLANS.

    (a) In General.--Part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), as amended by section 2003, is further 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 1851. MEDICARE DRUG BENEFIT PLANS.

    ``(a) In General.--
            ``(1) General permission to contract.--The Secretary may 
        enter into contracts with medicare drug benefit plans in a 
        State for the provision of covered outpatient drugs (as defined 
        in section 1861(t)(2)) (except as provided in subsection 
        (i)(3)(G)) to individuals entitled to benefits under part A and 
        enrolled under part B if the plan meets the requirements of 
        this section with respect to individuals enrolled under this 
        section.
            ``(2) Entities eligible to enter into a contract.--The 
        Secretary may enter into a contract under this section with a 
        medicare drug benefit plan that is--
                    ``(A) a certified standard health plan but only if 
                such plan has not entered into a contract with the 
                Secretary under section 1876;
                    ``(B) a network of chain and independent pharmacy 
                providers;
                    ``(C) a pharmacy benefit management company; or
                    ``(D) any other entity that the Secretary 
                determines is appropriate.
            ``(3) Availability of plans.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Every individual entitled to 
                benefits under part A and enrolled under part B shall 
                be eligible to enroll under this section with any 
                medicare drug benefit plan with a contract under this 
                section which serves the State in which the individual 
                resides.
                    ``(B) Enrollment by an individual.--In accordance 
                with the enrollment periods established under 
                subsection (e)(1), an individual may enroll under this 
                section with a medicare drug benefit plan with a 
                contract under this section only through a third party 
                designated by the Secretary in regulations and the 
                individual may only terminate enrollment in accordance 
                with subsection (e)(2).
                    ``(C) Information distributed by the secretary.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
                        develop and distribute comparative materials to 
                        individuals eligible to enroll under this 
                        section regarding all medicare drug benefit 
                        plans with contracts under this section, the 
                        availability of payment for covered outpatient 
                        drugs under section 1834(d), and the 
                        availability of covered outpatient drugs to 
                        enrollees of entities with contracts under 
                        section 1876. The Secretary shall include in 
                        such comparative materials that each medicare 
                        drug benefit plan with a contract under this 
                        section is authorized by law to terminate or 
                        refuse to renew the contract, and that 
                        termination or nonrenewal of the contract may 
                        result in termination of the enrollments of 
                        individuals enrolled with the plan under this 
                        section.
                            ``(ii) Provision of information by the 
                        plan.--Each medicare drug benefit plan with a 
                        contract under this section shall collect and 
                        provide such standard information as the 
                        Secretary shall prescribe by regulation as 
                        necessary to evaluate the performance and 
                        quality of such plan, including enrollee 
                        satisfaction, and to compare such performance 
                        and quality with competing plans.
            ``(4) Payments.--
                    ``(A) Payments in lieu of normal payments.--
                Payments under a contract to a medicare drug benefit 
                plan under this section shall be instead of the amounts 
                which (in the absence of the contract) would be 
                otherwise payable, pursuant to section 1834, for 
                covered outpatient drugs furnished by or through the 
                plan to individuals enrolled with the plan under this 
                section.
                    ``(B) Source of payment.--The payment to a medicare 
                drug benefit plan under this section for individuals 
                enrolled under this section with the plan and entitled 
                to benefits under part A and enrolled under part B 
                shall be made from the Federal Supplementary Medical 
                Insurance Trust Fund.
            ``(5) Definitions.--
                    ``(A) Service area.--The term `health plan service 
                area' means a health plan service area designated by 
                the State under section 1502(d) of the Health Security 
                Act.
                    ``(B) Certified standard health plan.--The term 
                `certified standard health plan' has the meaning given 
                such term in section 1011(2) of the Health Security 
                Act.
    ``(b) Payment Rules under Contracts.--
            ``(1) In general.--
                    ``(A) Payments.--With respect to any calendar year, 
                each medicare drug benefit plan with a contract under 
                this section shall receive a payment under this title 
                with respect to each individual enrolled with the plan 
                for each month such individual is enrolled equal to the 
                applicable monthly percentage of the lesser of--
                            ``(i) 95 percent of the fee for service 
                        component determined under paragraph (2)(B)(i) 
                        adjusted by the rate factor determined under 
                        subparagraph (C) for the class of such 
                        individual; or
                            ``(ii) the medicare drug benefit plan 
                        component determined under paragraph (2)(B)(ii) 
                        for the plan's service area adjusted by the 
                        rate factor determined under subparagraph (C) 
                        for the class of such individual.
                    ``(B) Applicable monthly percentage.--For purposes 
                of subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall annually set 
                the applicable monthly percentage for each month of the 
                calendar year. Such percentage for a month shall be 
                equal to the Secretary's estimate of the proportion of 
                the total covered outpatient drug benefit incurred in 
                such month under section 1834 to the total covered 
                outpatient drug benefit incurred for such year under 
                section 1834.
                    ``(C) Determination of classes of individuals and 
                rate factors for such classes.--
                            ``(i) Determination of classes.--For 
                        purposes of this section, the Secretary shall 
                        define appropriate classes of individuals based 
                        on such factors as the Secretary determines to 
                        be appropriate.
                            ``(ii) Rate factors.--The Secretary shall 
                        annually determine the rate factors for each 
                        class of individuals defined in clause (i) 
                        reflecting the differences in the average per 
                        capita spending for providing covered 
                        outpatient drug coverage under part B among 
                        individuals in such classes.
            ``(2) Determination of payment rate.--
                    ``(A) Determination by secretary.--The Secretary 
                shall annually determine under subparagraph (B), and 
                shall announce (in a manner intended to provide notice 
                to interested parties) not later than October 1 before 
                the calendar year concerned, the payment for each 
                service area.
                    ``(B) Formulas for determining payment amounts.--
                            ``(i) Fee-for-service component.--The 
                        amount determined under this clause is the 
                        projected average annual per capita drug fee-
                        for-service costs (as defined in subparagraph 
                        (D)) for covered outpatient drugs for the 
                        service area for individuals not enrolled in 
                        medicare drug benefit plans with contracts 
                        under this section or entities with contracts 
                        under section 1876, adjusted by the factor 
                        described in clause (ii)(I).
                            ``(ii) Medicare drug benefit plan 
                        component.--The medicare drug benefit plan 
                        component determined under this clause is the 
                        sum of the following amounts determined with 
                        respect to each medicare drug benefit plan--
                                    ``(I) the amount of the uniform 
                                annual premium submitted by the plan to 
                                the Secretary under subparagraph (C), 
                                adjusted by a factor determined by the 
                                Secretary to normalize the difference 
                                in the distribution of individuals 
                                projected to be enrolled in the plan 
                                among the various classes of 
                                individuals defined by the Secretary to 
                                the national distribution of all 
                                individuals in the program under this 
                                title among such classes; multiplied by
                                    ``(II) a fraction (expressed as a 
                                percentage), the numerator of which is 
                                the number of all individuals enrolled 
                                in the plan (as projected by the plan 
                                using either historical experience or 
                                some other methodology developed by the 
                                Secretary), and the denominator of 
                                which is the number of all individuals 
                                enrolled in all medicare drug benefit 
                                plans in the service area.
                    ``(C) Uniform annual premiums; premium for 
                additional services.--
                            ``(i) In general.--Each medicare drug 
                        benefit plan shall, not later than August 1 of 
                        each year, submit to the Secretary a bid for 
                        the next calendar year for each service area 
                        with respect to which the plan proposes to 
                        serve under a contract under this section. A 
                        bid with respect to a service area shall 
                        include the following:
                                    ``(I) Uniform annual premium.--A 
                                statement of the uniform annual premium 
                                amount that the plan intends to charge 
                                for individuals enrolled under this 
                                section with the plan.
                                    ``(II) Premium for supplemental 
                                plan.--A statement of the fixed monthly 
                                premium amount that the plan intends to 
                                charge for each supplemental plan 
                                offering additional cost-sharing 
                                benefits.
                            ``(ii) Notice before bid submissions.--At 
                        least 45 days before the date for submitting 
                        bids under clause (i) for a year, the Secretary 
                        shall provide for notice to medicare drug 
                        benefit plans of--
                                    ``(I) proposed changes to be made 
                                in the methodology or benefit coverage 
                                assumptions from the methodology and 
                                assumptions used in the previous 
                                calendar year and shall provide such 
                                plans an opportunity to comment on such 
                                proposed changes;
                                    ``(II) the applicable monthly 
                                percentage for each month of the 
                                calendar year as determined by the 
                                Secretary under paragraph (1)(B); and
                                    ``(III) the rate factors for such 
                                calendar year determined under 
                                paragraph (1)(C).
                    ``(D) Projected average annual per capita fee-for-
                service costs.--
                            ``(i) In general.--For purposes of 
                        subparagraph (B), the term `projected average 
                        annual per capita drug fee-for-service costs' 
                        means, with respect to a service area, the 
                        annual amount that the Secretary estimates in 
                        advance would be payable in any contract year 
                        for providing payment for covered outpatient 
                        drugs for individuals enrolled under part B 
                        (including administrative costs incurred by 
                        organizations described in section 1842), if 
                        the services were to be furnished by other than 
                        a medicare drug benefit plan with a contract 
                        under this section or by an entities with a 
                        contract under section 1876.
                            ``(ii) Basis for estimates.--The estimate 
                        made by the Secretary under clause (i) shall be 
                        made on the basis of actual experience of the 
                        service area or, if the Secretary determines 
                        that the data in that service area are 
                        inadequate to make an accurate estimate, the 
                        Secretary may use the actual experience of a 
                        similar area, with appropriate adjustments to 
                        assure actuarial equivalence, including 
                        adjustments the Secretary may determine 
                        appropriate to adjust for demographics, health 
                        status, and the presence of specific medical 
                        conditions. For the first 2 years that 
                        contracts are entered into under this section, 
                        the Secretary shall base such estimates on the 
                        best available data.
            ``(3) Payment rules.--
                    ``(A) Amount of premium.--
                            ``(i) Standard package.--Each medicare drug 
                        benefit plan with a contract under this section 
                        must provide to individuals enrolled with the 
                        plan under this section, for each month of the 
                        duration of such enrollment during each 
                        contract period, the coverage described in 
                        subsection (d) for the lesser of--
                                    ``(I) the applicable monthly 
                                percentage of the uniform annual 
                                premium amount submitted under 
                                paragraph (2)(C)(i)(I); or
                                    ``(II) the applicable monthly 
                                percentage of the amount described in 
                                subsection (b)(1)(A).
                            ``(ii) Supplemental plan.--
                                    ``(I) In general.--Each medicare 
                                drug benefit plan with a contract under 
                                this section must provide to 
                                individuals enrolled with the plan 
                                under this section, for the duration of 
                                such enrollment during each contract 
                                period, a fixed monthly premium for the 
                                supplemental plan described in 
                                paragraph (2)(C)(i)(II) equal to the 
                                premium amount determined by the plan 
                                under such paragraph. An individual 
                                that elects to enroll in the 
                                supplemental plan shall be responsible 
                                for paying to the plan the fixed 
                                monthly premium amount described in the 
                                preceding sentence.
                                    ``(II) Payment greater than fixed 
                                monthly premium.--If, with respect to 
                                any individual enrolled in a medicare 
                                drug benefit plan with a contract under 
                                this section, the amount paid to the 
                                plan under subsection (b)(1)(A) exceeds 
                                the applicable monthly percentage of 
                                the uniform annual premium amount 
                                submitted under paragraph (2)(C)(i)(I), 
                                the plan shall apply such excess to a 
                                premium for any supplemental policy 
                                described in paragraph (2)(C)(ii) that 
                                the individual may elect. If the 
                                individual does not elect such a 
                                policy, the medicare drug benefit plan 
                                shall pay such excess to the Secretary 
                                for deposit in the Federal 
                                Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
                                Fund.
                    ``(B) Monthly payments.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall make 
                        monthly payments in advance and in accordance 
                        with the rate determined under paragraph (1)(A) 
                        to each medicare drug benefit plan with a 
                        contract under this section for each individual 
                        enrolled with the plan under this section.
                            ``(ii) Adjustments.--The amount of payment 
                        under this subparagraph may be retroactively 
                        adjusted to take into account any difference 
                        between the actual number of individuals 
                        enrolled in the plan under this section and the 
                        number of such individuals estimated to be so 
                        enrolled in determining the amount of the 
                        advance payment.
                            ``(iii) Payment to plan only.--If an 
                        individual is enrolled under this section with 
                        a medicare drug benefit plan with a contract 
                        under this section, only the plan shall be 
                        entitled to receive payments from the Secretary 
                        under this title for covered outpatient drugs 
                        furnished to the individual.
    ``(d) Coverage of Benefits.--
            ``(1) Drugs provided.--A medicare drug benefit plan with a 
        contract under this section must provide to individuals 
        enrolled in the plan under this section covered outpatient 
        drugs (as defined in section 1861(t)(2)), except as provided in 
        subsection (i)(3)(G).
            ``(2) Provision of medically necessary care.--Each medicare 
        drug benefit plan with a contract under this section must--
                    ``(A) make the covered outpatient drugs described 
                in paragraph (1)--
                            ``(i) available and accessible to enrolled 
                        individuals within the State with reasonable 
                        promptness and in a manner which assures 
                        continuity, and
                            ``(ii) when medically necessary, available 
                        and accessible twenty-four hours a day and 
                        seven days a week, and
                    ``(B) provide for reimbursement with respect to 
                drugs which are described in subparagraph (A) and which 
                are provided to such an individual other than through 
                the plan, if--
                            ``(i) the drugs were medically necessary 
                        and immediately required because of an 
                        unforeseen illness, injury, or condition, and
                            ``(ii) it was not reasonable given the 
                        circumstances to obtain the drugs through the 
                        plan.
            ``(3) Cost-sharing.--Each medicare drug benefit plan with a 
        contract under this section must provide to individuals 
        enrolled under this section with respect to the drugs described 
        in paragraph (1), cost-sharing requirements that are the same 
        as the cost-sharing requirements for covered outpatient drug 
        under section 1834, except that the deductible for a medicare 
        drug benefit plan shall be reduced by an amount determined by 
        the Secretary such that the cost-sharing of the plan is equal 
        to 95 percent of the actuarial value of the cost sharing 
        requirements under section 1834.
            ``(4) Cost-sharing for supplemental plans.--A supplemental 
        plan may not have cost-sharing that applies differential cost-
        sharing based on the therapeutic class of drug prescribed or 
        other cost-sharing structures that the Secretary determines 
        would be likely to discourage enrollment by individuals with 
        medical conditions that require extensive use of prescription 
        drugs.
            ``(5) Actuarial equivalence of standard plan and 
        supplemental plan.--The premium charged to an individual 
        enrolled under this section for a supplemental policy that 
        eliminates or reduces the cost-sharing requirement imposed on 
        such individual and the actuarial value of any remaining cost-
        sharing requirement under the plan shall not exceed 95 percent 
        of the actuarial value of the cost-sharing requirements under 
        section 1834.
    ``(e) Enrollment.--
            ``(1) Enrollment periods.--Each medicare drug benefit plan 
        with a contract under this section must have a uniform open 
        enrollment period (which shall be the period specified by the 
        Secretary under section 1876(c)(3)(A)(i)), for the enrollment 
        of individuals under this section, of at least 30 days duration 
        every year. The plan must also have additional enrollment 
        periods in accordance with the enrollment periods required 
        under clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) of section 1876(c)(3)(A).
            ``(2) Termination.--An individual may only terminate an 
        individual's enrollment with a medicare drug benefit plan 
        during an open enrollment period described in paragraph (1).
            ``(3) Nondiscrimination.--The medicare drug benefit plan 
        must provide assurances to the Secretary that it will not 
        discriminate against any individual because of the individual's 
        health status, requirements for covered outpatient drugs, 
        claims experience, medical history, or other factors that are 
        generally related to the need for covered outpatient drugs and 
        that it will notify each individual of such fact at the time of 
        the individual's enrollment.
            ``(4) Notice of rights, etc.--Each medicare drug benefit 
        plan with a contract under this section shall provide each 
        enrollee, at the time of enrollment and not less frequently 
        than annually thereafter, an explanation of the enrollee's 
        rights under this section, including an explanation of--
                    ``(A) the enrollee's rights to benefits from the 
                plan,
                    ``(B) the restrictions on payments under this title 
                for covered outpatient drugs furnished other than by or 
                through the plan,
                    ``(C) out-of-plan coverage provided by the plan, 
                and
                    ``(D) appeal rights of enrollees.
    ``(f) Membership Requirements.--
            ``(1) Non-medicare requirement.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Each entity with a contract 
                under this section shall provide at that at least 1/2 
                of the individuals who are provided with drug coverage 
                by the entity are individuals who are not enrolled in a 
                medicare drug benefit plan under this section.
                    ``(B) Suspension of enrollment.--If the Secretary 
                determines that a medicare drug benefit plan with a 
                contract under this section has failed to comply with 
                the requirements of this subsection, the Secretary may 
                provide for the suspension of enrollment of individuals 
                under this section or of payment to the plan under this 
                section for individuals newly enrolled with the plan, 
                after the date the Secretary notifies the plan of such 
                noncompliance.
            ``(2) 5000 individuals.--Each medicare drug benefit plan 
        with a contract under this section shall provide covered 
        outpatient drug coverage to at least 5000 individuals, except 
        that the Secretary may enter into such a contract with a 
        medicare drug benefit plan that has fewer enrollees if the plan 
        primarily serves members residing outside of urbanized areas.
    ``(g) Payment Rules for Plans.--
            ``(1) Subrogation rights.--Notwithstanding any other 
        provision of law, the medicare drug benefit plan may, (in the 
        case of the provision of covered outpatient drugs to an 
        individual enrolled under this section for a drug for which the 
        member is entitled to benefits under a workmen's compensation 
        law or plan of the United States or a State, under an 
        automobile or liability insurance policy or plan, including a 
        self-insured plan, under no fault insurance, or under a primary 
        plan (as defined in section 1862(b)(2)(A)) charge or authorize 
        the provider of such services to charge, in accordance with the 
        charges allowed under such law or policy--
                    ``(A) the insurance carrier, employer, or other 
                entity which under such law, plan, or policy is to pay 
                for the provision of such services, or
                    ``(B) such enrollee to the extent that the enrollee 
                has been paid under such law, plan, or policy for such 
                services.
            ``(2) Prompt payment requirement.--
                    ``(A) In general.--A contract under this section 
                shall require the medicare drug benefit plan to provide 
                prompt payment (consistent with the provisions of 
                section 1842(c)(4)) of claims submitted for covered 
                outpatient drugs furnished to individuals pursuant to 
                such contract, if the drugs are not furnished under a 
                contract between the plan and the provider or supplier.
                    ``(B) Failure.--In the case of a plan which the 
                Secretary determines, after notice and opportunity for 
                a hearing, has failed to make payments of amounts in 
                compliance with subparagraph (A), the Secretary may 
                provide for direct payment of the amounts owed to 
                providers and suppliers for such covered services 
                furnished to individuals enrolled under this section 
                under the contract. If the Secretary provides for such 
                direct payments, the Secretary shall provide for an 
                appropriate reduction in the amount of payments 
                otherwise made to the plan under this section to 
                reflect the amount of the Secretary's payments (and 
                costs incurred by the Secretary in making such 
                payments).
    ``(h) Duration, Termination, Effective Date, and Terms of Contract; 
Powers and Duties of Secretary.--
            ``(1) Duration and termination.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
                subparagraph (B), each contract under this section 
                shall be for a term of at least one year, as determined 
                by the Secretary, and may be made automatically 
                renewable from term to term in the absence of notice by 
                either party of intention to terminate at the end of 
                the current term.
                    ``(B) Exception.--The Secretary may terminate a 
                contract at any time (after such reasonable notice and 
                opportunity for hearing to the medicare drug benefit 
                plan involved as the Secretary may provide in 
                regulations), if the Secretary finds that the plan--
                            ``(i) has failed substantially to carry out 
                        the contract,
                            ``(ii) is carrying out the contract in a 
                        manner inconsistent with the efficient and 
                        effective administration of this section, or
                            ``(iii) no longer substantially complies 
                        with the requirements of this section.
            ``(2) Effective date.--The effective date of any contract 
        executed pursuant to this section shall be specified in the 
        contract.
            ``(3) Terms.--Each contract under this section--
                    ``(A) shall provide that the Secretary, or any 
                person or organization designated by the Secretary--
                            ``(i) shall have the right to inspect or 
                        otherwise evaluate--
                                    ``(I) the quality, appropriateness, 
                                and timeliness of drugs provided under 
                                the contract, and
                                    ``(II) the facilities of the 
                                organization when there is reasonable 
                                evidence of some need for such 
                                inspection, and
                            ``(ii) shall have the right to audit and 
                        inspect any books and records of the medicare 
                        drug benefit plan that pertain--
                                    ``(I) to the ability of the plan to 
                                bear the risk of potential financial 
                                losses, or
                                    ``(II) to drugs provided or 
                                determinations of amounts payable under 
                                the contract;
                    ``(B) shall require the plan with a contract to 
                provide (and pay for) written notice in advance of the 
                contract's termination, as well as a description of 
                alternatives for obtaining benefits under this title, 
                to each individual enrolled under this section with the 
                plan;
                    ``(C)(i) shall require the plan to comply with 
                subsections (a) and (c) of section 1318 of the Public 
                Health Service Act (relating to disclosure of certain 
                financial information) and with the requirement of 
                section 1301(c)(8) of such Act (relating to liability 
                arrangements to protect members);
                    ``(ii) shall require the plan to provide and supply 
                information determined appropriate by the Secretary in 
                the manner determined appropriate by the Secretary; and
                    ``(iii) shall require the plan to notify the 
                Secretary of loans and other special financial 
                arrangements which are made between the plan and 
                subcontractors, affiliates, and related parties; and
                    ``(D) shall contain such other terms and conditions 
                not inconsistent with this section (including requiring 
                the organization to provide the Secretary with such 
                information) as the Secretary may find necessary and 
                appropriate.
            ``(4) Period of disqualification.--The Secretary may not 
        enter into a contract with a medicare drug benefit plan if a 
        previous contract with that plan under this section was 
        terminated at the request of the plan within the preceding 5-
        year period or if the plan submits a bid under subsection 
        (b)(2)(C) and does not enter into a contract, except in 
        circumstances which warrant special consideration, as 
        determined by the Secretary.
            ``(5) Disregard of certain inconsistent laws, etc.--The 
        authority vested in the Secretary by this section may be 
        performed without regard to such provisions of law or 
        regulations relating to the making, performance, amendment, or 
        modification of contracts of the United States as the Secretary 
        may determine to be inconsistent with the furtherance of the 
        purpose of this title.
            ``(6) Findings of failure.--
                    ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary determines that 
                medicare drug benefit plan with a contract under this 
                section--
                            ``(i) fails substantially to provide 
                        medically necessary covered outpatient drugs 
                        that are required (under law or under the 
                        contract) to be provided to an individual 
                        covered under the contract, if the failure has 
                        adversely affected (or has substantial 
                        likelihood of adversely affecting) the 
                        individual;
                            ``(ii) imposes premiums on individuals 
                        enrolled under this section in excess of the 
                        premiums permitted;
                            ``(iii) acts to expel or to refuse to re-
                        enroll an individual in violation of the 
                        provisions of this section;
                            ``(iv) engages in any practice that would 
                        reasonably be expected to have the effect of 
                        denying or discouraging enrollment (except as 
                        permitted by this section) by eligible 
                        individuals with the plan whose medical 
                        condition or history indicates a need for 
                        substantial future covered outpatient drugs;
                            ``(v) misrepresents or falsifies 
                        information that is furnished--
                                    ``(I) to the Secretary under this 
                                section, or
                                    ``(II) to an individual or to any 
                                other entity under this section;
                            ``(vi) employs or contracts with any 
                        individual or entity that is excluded from 
                        participation under this title under section 
                        1128 or 1128A for the provision of health care, 
                        utilization review, medical social work, or 
                        administrative services or employs or contracts 
                        with any entity for the provision (directly or 
                        indirectly) through such an excluded individual 
                        or entity of such services;
                the Secretary may provide, in addition to any other 
                remedies authorized by law, for any of the remedies 
                described in subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Remedies.--The remedies described in this 
                subparagraph are--
                            ``(i) civil money penalties of not more 
                        than $25,000 for each determination under 
                        subparagraph (A) or, with respect to a 
                        determination under clause (iv) or (v)(I) of 
                        such subparagraph, of not more than $100,000 
                        for each such determination, plus, with respect 
                        to a determination under subparagraph (A)(ii), 
                        double the excess amount charged in violation 
                        of such subparagraph (and the excess amount 
                        charged shall be deducted from the penalty and 
                        returned to the individual concerned), and 
                        plus, with respect to a determination under 
                        subparagraph (A)(iv), $15,000 for each 
                        individual not enrolled as a result of the 
                        practice involved,
                            ``(ii) suspension of enrollment of 
                        individuals under this section after the date 
                        the Secretary notifies the plan of a 
                        determination under subparagraph (A) and until 
                        the Secretary is satisfied that the basis for 
                        such determination has been corrected and is 
                        not likely to recur, or
                            ``(iii) suspension of payment to the plan 
                        under this section for individuals enrolled 
                        after the date the Secretary notifies the plan 
                        of a determination under subparagraph (A) and 
                        until the Secretary is satisfied that the basis 
                        for such determination has been corrected and 
                        is not likely to recur.
                The provisions of section 1128A (other than subsections 
                (a) and (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty under 
                clause (i) in the same manner as they apply to a civil 
                money penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
    ``(i) Other General Requirements on Plans.--
            ``(1) Grievance procedures.--Each medicare drug benefit 
        plan with a contract under this section must provide meaningful 
        procedures for hearing and resolving grievances between the 
        plan (including any entity or individual through which the plan 
        provides health care services) and individuals enrolled with 
        the plan under this section.
            ``(2) Appeals.--An individual enrolled with a medicare drug 
        benefit plan under this section who is dissatisfied by reason 
        of the individual's failure to receive any covered outpatient 
        drug to which the individual believes the individual is 
        entitled and at no greater charge than the individual believes 
        the individual is required to pay is entitled, if the amount in 
        controversy is $100 or more, to a hearing before the Secretary 
        to the same extent as is provided in section 205(b), and in any 
        such hearing the Secretary shall make the plan a party. If the 
        amount in controversy is $1,000 or more, the individual or plan 
        shall, upon notifying the other party, be entitled to judicial 
        review of the Secretary's final decision as provided in section 
        205(g), and both the individual and the plan shall be entitled 
        to be parties to that judicial review.
            ``(3) Additional requirements.--Not later then January 1, 
        1998, the Secretary shall establish standards for additional 
        requirements for medicare drug benefit plans with contracts 
        under this section, that to the extent possible are consistent 
        with the standards relating to eligible organizations that have 
        entered into risk contracts under section 1876, and which 
        provide that a medicare drug benefit plan--
                    ``(A) must demonstrate financial solvency;
                    ``(B) must demonstrate the ability to provide 
                benefits to all potential enrollees throughout the 
                State served by the plan;
                    ``(C) must not engage in marketing or other 
                practices designed to discourage or limit the issuance 
                of a medicare outpatient drug coverage plan to any 
                potential enrollee on the basis of health status, 
                claims experience, medical history, or other factors 
                that are generally related to utilization of covered 
                outpatient drugs;
                    ``(D) must inform individuals eligible to enroll 
                with the plan about the plan only in accordance with 
                procedures and conditions determined by the Secretary 
                and may not distribute promotional or informational 
                material unless--
                            ``(i) at least 45 days before its 
                        distribution, the plan has submitted the 
                        material to the Secretary for review,
                            ``(ii) the material is made available to 
                        all individuals eligible to enroll in the plan 
                        in the State served by the plan, and
                            ``(iii) the Secretary has not disapproved 
                        the distribution of the material due to a 
                        determination that in the Secretary's 
                        discretion, the material is materially 
                        inaccurate or misleading or otherwise makes a 
                        material misrepresentation;
                    ``(E) must provide convenient access to pharmacies 
                for individuals in each zip code region of the State 
                taking into account the special needs of individuals 
                who are enrolled in part B;
                    ``(F) in addition to the access described in 
                subparagraph (E), may provide enrollees with a mail-
                order pharmacy option;
                    ``(G) may establish a formulary system (to be 
                maintained throughout the 1-year contract period) which 
                ensures that--
                            ``(i) the formulary shall cover at least 
                        one covered outpatient drug in each therapeutic 
                        class of drugs representing a unique mechanism 
                        of action (as defined by the Secretary); and
                            ``(ii) that any covered outpatient drug 
                        excluded by the formulary is subject to a prior 
                        authorization process in which the plan may not 
                        deny approval of any drug unless the plan 
                        complies with the process described in section 
                        1834(d)(7)(C)(iii);
                    ``(H) must disclose any special relationships or 
                arrangements with drug manufacturers, including 
                ownership arrangements, distribution arrangements, or 
                alliances;
                    ``(I) must have standards to assure the appropriate 
                use of outpatient prescription medications, including a 
                program of prospective and retrospective drug use 
                review, consistent with standards under the drug use 
                review program developed by the Secretary under section 
                1834(d)(7), including for any mail order services 
                operated or used by the plan; and
                    ``(J) is able to process claims for outpatient 
                prescription drugs under the program through an on-line 
                real time point of sale system, and has developed a 
                process for processing out-of-area claims.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall be 
effective with respect to contracts entered into on or after January 1, 
1999.

SEC. 2007. PAYMENT FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUG BENEFIT UNDER MEDICARE 
              CONTRACTS WITH HMOS AND CMPS.

    (a) In General.--In providing for payments for the covered 
outpatient drug benefit, as added by section 2001, to entities with 
risk contracts under section 1876 of the Social Security Act, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services may base such payment on classes 
of enrollees or geographic factors that are different than the classes 
or geographic factors otherwise utilized for determining payment under 
such section.
    (b) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to contracts entered 
into on or after January 1, 1999.

SEC. 2008. MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT.

    (a) Maintenance of Effort with Respect to Prescription Drugs.--
Section 1862(b)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(F) Prescription drugs.--
                            ``(i) In general.--A group health plan may 
                        not take into account that an individual (or 
                        the individual's spouse) who is covered under 
                        the plan by virtue of the individual's current 
                        retirement status with an employer may be 
                        eligible to receive covered outpatient drug 
                        coverage under part B, except that this 
                        subparagraph shall not prohibit a plan from 
                        taking into account that an individual is 
                        eligible to receive covered outpatient drug 
                        coverage under part B on or after January 1, 
                        2002. To the extent that the group health plan 
                        furnishes prescription drugs pursuant to a 
                        collectively bargained agreement, this 
                        subparagraph shall prohibit a plan from taking 
                        into account that an individual is eligible to 
                        receive covered outpatient drug coverage under 
                        part B for the greater of the period of the 
                        agreement or until January 1, 2002.
                            ``(ii) Current retirement status.--An 
                        individual has `current retirement status' with 
                        an employer if the individual no longer has 
                        current employment status due to the 
                        individual's retirement from such employment 
                        status.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to group health plans offering prescription drug coverage on or 
after January 1, 1994.

             Subtitle B--Home and Community-Based Services

    PART 1--HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH 
                              DISABILITIES

SEC. 2101. STATE PROGRAMS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES FOR 
              INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.

    (a) In General.--Each State that has a plan for home and community-
based services for individuals with disabilities submitted to and 
approved by the Secretary under section 2102(b) is entitled to payment 
in accordance with section 2108.
    (b) Entitlement to Services.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
construed to create a right to services for individuals or a 
requirement that a State with an approved plan expend the entire amount 
of funds to which it is entitled under this subtitle.
    (c) Designation of Agency.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
of enactment of this subtitle, the Secretary shall designate an agency 
responsible for program administration under this subtitle.

SEC. 2102. STATE PLANS.

    (a) Plan Requirements.--In order to be approved under subsection 
(b), a State plan for home and community-based services for individuals 
with disabilities must meet the following requirements:
            (1) State maintenance of effort.--
                    (A) In general.--A State plan under this subtitle 
                shall provide that the State will, during any fiscal 
                year that the State is furnishing services under this 
                subtitle, make expenditures of State funds in an amount 
                equal to the State maintenance of effort amount for the 
                year determined under subparagraph (B) for furnishing 
                the services described in subparagraph (C) under the 
                State plan under this subtitle and the State plan under 
                title XIX of the Social Security Act.
                    (B) State maintenance of effort amount.--
                            (i) In general.--The maintenance of effort 
                        amount for a State for a fiscal year is an 
                        amount equal to--
                                    (I) for fiscal year 1998, the base 
                                amount for the State (as determined 
                                under clause (ii)) updated through the 
                                midpoint of fiscal year 1998 by the 
                                estimated percentage change in the 
                                consumer price index during the period 
                                beginning on October 1, 1994 and ending 
                                at that midpoint; and
                                    (II) for succeeding fiscal years, 
                                an amount equal to the amount 
                                determined under this clause for the 
                                previous fiscal year updated through 
                                the midpoint of the year by the 
                                estimated percentage change in the 
                                consumer price index during the 12-
                                month period ending at that midpoint, 
                                with appropriate adjustments to reflect 
                                previous underestimations or 
                                overestimations under this clause in 
                                the projected percentage change in the 
                                consumer price index.
                            (ii) State base amount.--The base amount 
                        for a State is an amount equal to the total 
                        expenditures from State funds made under the 
                        State plan under title XIX of the Social 
                        Security Act during fiscal year 1994 with 
                        respect to medical assistance consisting of the 
                        services described in subparagraph (C).
                    (C) Medicaid services described.--The services 
                described in this subparagraph are the following:
                            (i) Personal care services (as described in 
                        section 1905(a)(24) of the Social Security 
                        Act).
                            (ii) Home or community-based services 
                        furnished under a waiver granted under 
                        subsection (c), (d), or (e) of section 1915 of 
                        such Act.
                            (iii) Home and community care furnished to 
                        functionally disabled elderly individuals under 
                        section 1929 of such Act.
                            (iv) Community supported living 
                        arrangements services under section 1930 of 
                        such Act.
            (2) Eligibility.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
                (B), within the amounts provided by the State and under 
                section 2108 for such plan, the plan shall provide that 
                services under the plan will be available to 
                individuals with disabilities (as defined in section 
                2103(a)) in the State.
                    (C) Initial screening.--The plan shall provide a 
                process for the initial screening of an individual who 
                appears to have some reasonable likelihood of being an 
                individual with disabilities. Any such process shall 
                require the provision of assistance to individuals who 
                wish to apply but whose disability limits their ability 
                to apply. The initial screening and the determination 
                of disability (as defined under section 2103(b)(1)) 
                shall be conducted by a public agency.
                    (D) Restrictions.--The plan may not limit the 
                eligibility of individuals with disabilities based on--
                            (i) income,
                            (ii) age,
                            (iii) residential setting (other than an 
                        institutional setting), or
                            (iv) other grounds specified by the 
                        Secretary.
                    (E) Continuation of services.--The plan must 
                provide assurances that, in the case of an individual 
                receiving medical assistance for home and community-
                based services under the State medicaid plan under 
                title XIX of the Social Security Act as of the date a 
                State's plan is approved under this subtitle, the State 
                will continue to make available (either under this 
                plan, under the State medicaid plan, or otherwise) to 
                such individual an appropriate level of assistance for 
                home and community-based services, taking into account 
                the level of assistance provided as of such date and 
                the individual's need for home and community-based 
                services.
            (3) Services.--
                    (A) Needs assessment.--Not later than the end of 
                the second year of implementation, the plan or its 
                amendments shall include the results of a statewide 
                assessment of the needs of individuals with 
                disabilities in a format required by the Secretary. The 
                needs assessment shall include demographic data 
                concerning the number of individuals within each 
                category of disability described in this subtitle, and 
                the services available to meet the needs of such 
                individuals.
                    (B) Specification.--Consistent with section 2104, 
                the plan shall specify--
                            (i) the services made available under the 
                        plan,
                            (ii) the extent and manner in which such 
                        services are allocated and made available to 
                        individuals with disabilities, and
                            (iii) the manner in which services under 
                        the plan are coordinated with each other and 
                        with health and long-term care services 
                        available outside the plan for individuals with 
                        disabilities.
                    (C) Taking into account informal care.--A State 
                plan may take into account, in determining the amount 
                and array of services made available to covered 
                individuals with disabilities, the availability of 
                informal care.
                    (D) Allocation.--The State plan--
                            (i) shall specify how services under the 
                        plan will be allocated among covered 
                        individuals with disabilities,
                            (ii) shall attempt to meet the needs of 
                        individuals with a variety of disabilities 
                        within the limits of available funding,
                            (iii) shall include services that assist 
                        all categories of individuals with 
                        disabilities, regardless of their age or the 
                        nature of their disabling conditions,
                            (iv) shall demonstrate that services are 
                        allocated equitably, in accordance with the 
                        needs assessment required under subparagraph 
                        (A), and
                            (v) shall ensure that--
                                    (I) the proportion of the 
                                population of low-income individuals 
                                with disabilities in the State that 
                                represents individuals with 
                                disabilities who are provided home and 
                                community-based services either under 
                                the plan, under the State medicaid 
                                plan, or under both, is not less than,
                                    (II) the proportion of the 
                                population of the State that represents 
                                individuals who are low-income 
                                individuals.
                    (E) Limitation on licensure or certification.--The 
                State may not subject consumer-directed providers of 
                personal assistance services to licensure, 
                certification, or other requirements which the 
                Secretary finds not to be necessary for the health and 
                safety of individuals with disabilities.
                    (F) Consumer choice.--To the extent feasible, the 
                State shall follow the choice of an individual with 
                disabilities (or that individual's designated 
                representative who may be a family member) regarding 
                which covered services to receive and the providers who 
                will provide such services.
            (4) Cost sharing.--The plan shall impose cost sharing with 
        respect to covered services in accordance with section 2105.
            (5) Types of providers and requirements for 
        participation.--The plan shall specify--
                    (A) the types of service providers eligible to 
                participate in the program under the plan, which shall 
                include consumer-directed providers of personal 
                assistance services, except that the plan--
                            (i) may not limit benefits to services 
                        provided by registered nurses or licensed 
                        practical nurses; and
                            (ii) may not limit benefits to services 
                        provided by agencies or providers certified 
                        under title XVIII; and
                    (B) any requirements for participation applicable 
                to each type of service provider.
            (6) Provider reimbursement.--
                    (A) Payment methods.--The plan shall specify the 
                payment methods to be used to reimburse providers for 
                services furnished under the plan. Such methods may 
                include retrospective reimbursement on a fee-for-
                service basis, prepayment on a capitation basis, 
                payment by cash or vouchers to individuals with 
                disabilities, or any combination of these methods. In 
                the case of payment to consumer-directed providers of 
                personal assistance services, including payment through 
                the use of cash or vouchers, the plan shall specify how 
                the plan will assure compliance with applicable 
                employment tax and health care coverage provisions.
                    (B) Payment rates.--The plan shall specify the 
                methods and criteria to be used to set payment rates 
                for--
                            (i) agency administered services furnished 
                        under the plan; and
                            (ii) consumer-directed personal assistance 
                        services furnished under the plan, including 
                        cash payments or vouchers to individuals with 
                        disabilities, except that such payments shall 
                        be adequate to cover amounts required under 
                        applicable employment tax and health care 
                        coverage provisions.
                    (C) Plan payment as payment in full.--The plan 
                shall restrict payment under the plan for covered 
                services to those providers that agree to accept the 
                payment under the plan (at the rates established 
                pursuant to subparagraph (B)) and any cost sharing 
                permitted or provided for under section 2105 as payment 
                in full for services furnished under the plan.
            (7) Quality assurance and safeguards.--The State plan shall 
        provide for quality assurance and safeguards for applicants and 
        beneficiaries in accordance with section 2106.
            (8) Advisory group.--The State plan shall--
                    (A) assure the establishment and maintenance of an 
                advisory group under section 2107(b), and
                    (B) include the documentation prepared by the group 
                under section 2107(b)(4).
            (9) Administration and access.--
                    (A) State agency.--The plan shall designate a State 
                agency or agencies to administer (or to supervise the 
                administration of) the plan.
                    (B) Coordination.--The plan shall specify how it 
                will--
                            (i) coordinate services provided under the 
                        plan, including eligibility prescreening, 
                        service coordination, and referrals for 
                        individuals with disabilities who are 
                        ineligible for services under this subtitle 
                        with the State medicaid plan under title XIX of 
                        the Social Security Act, titles V and XX of 
                        such Act, programs under the Older Americans 
                        Act of 1965, programs under the Developmental 
                        Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act, 
                        the Individuals with Disabilities Education 
                        Act, and any other Federal or State programs 
                        that provide services or assistance targeted to 
                        individuals with disabilities; and
                            (ii) coordinate with health plans.
                    (C) Administrative expenditures.--Effective 
                beginning with fiscal year 2004, the plan shall contain 
                assurances that not more than 10 percent of 
                expenditures under the plan for all quarters in any 
                fiscal year shall be for administrative costs.
            (10) Reports and information to secretary; audits.--The 
        plan shall provide that the State will furnish to the 
        Secretary--
                    (A) such reports, and will cooperate with such 
                audits, as the Secretary determines are needed 
                concerning the State's administration of its plan under 
                this subtitle, including the processing of claims under 
                the plan, and
                    (B) such data and information as the Secretary may 
                require in a uniform format as specified by the 
                Secretary.
            (11) Use of state funds for matching.--The plan shall 
        provide assurances that Federal funds will not be used to 
        provide for the State share of expenditures under this 
        subtitle.
            (12) Health care worker redeployment.--The plan shall 
        provide for the following:
                    (A) Before initiating the process of implementing 
                the State program under such plan, negotiations will be 
                commenced with labor unions representing the employees 
                of the affected hospitals or other facilities.
                    (B) Negotiations under subparagraph (A) will 
                address the following:
                            (i) The impact of the implementation of the 
                        program upon the workforce.
                            (ii) Methods to redeploy workers to 
                        positions in the proposed system, in the case 
                        of workers affected by the program.
                    (C) The plan will provide evidence that there has 
                been compliance with subparagraphs (A) and (B), 
                including a description of the results of the 
                negotiations.
            (13) Terminology.--The plan shall adhere to uniform 
        definitions of terms, as specified by the Secretary.
    (b) Approval of Plans.--The Secretary shall approve a plan 
submitted by a State if the Secretary determines that the plan--
            (1) was developed by the State after a public comment 
        period of not less than 30 days, and
            (2) meets the requirements of subsection (a).
The approval of such a plan shall take effect as of the first day of 
the first fiscal year beginning after the date of such approval (except 
that any approval made before January 1, 1998, shall be effective as of 
January 1, 1998). In order to budget funds allotted under this 
subtitle, the Secretary shall establish a deadline for the submission 
of such a plan before the beginning of a fiscal year as a condition of 
its approval effective with that fiscal year. Any significant changes 
to the State plan shall be submitted to the Secretary in the form of 
plan amendments and shall be subject to approval by the Secretary.
    (c) Monitoring.--The Secretary shall annually monitor the 
compliance of State plans with the requirements of this subtitle 
according to specified performance standards. In accordance with 
section 2108(e), States that fail to comply with such requirements may 
be subject to a reduction in the Federal matching rates available to 
the State under section 2108(a) or the withholding of Federal funds for 
services or administration until such time as compliance is achieved.
    (d) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall ensure the 
availability of ongoing technical assistance to States under this 
section. Such assistance shall include serving as a clearinghouse for 
information regarding successful practices in providing long-term care 
services.
    (e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may 
be appropriate to carry out this subtitle on a timely basis.

SEC. 2103. INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES DEFINED.

    (a) In General.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
`individual with disabilities' means any individual within one or more 
of the following categories of individuals:
            (1) Individuals requiring help with activities of daily 
        living.--An individual of any age who--
                    (A) requires hands-on or standby assistance, 
                supervision, or cueing (as defined in regulations) to 
                perform three or more activities of daily living (as 
                defined in subsection (d)), and
                    (B) is expected to require such assistance, 
                supervision, or cueing over a period of at least 90 
                days.
            (2) Individuals with severe cognitive or mental 
        impairment.--An individual of any age--
                    (A) whose score, on a standard mental status 
                protocol (or protocols) appropriate for measuring the 
                individual's particular condition specified by the 
                Secretary, indicates either severe cognitive impairment 
                or severe mental impairment, or both;
                    (B) who--
                            (i) requires hands-on or standby 
                        assistance, supervision, or cueing with one or 
                        more activities of daily living;
                            (ii) requires hands-on or standby 
                        assistance, supervision, or cueing with at 
                        least such instrumental activity (or 
                        activities) of daily living related to 
                        cognitive or mental impairment as the Secretary 
                        specifies; or
                            (iii) displays symptoms of one or more 
                        serious behavioral problems (that is on a list 
                        of such problems specified by the Secretary) 
                        which create a need for supervision to prevent 
                        harm to self or others; and
                    (C) who is expected to meet the requirements of 
                subparagraphs (A) and (B) over a period of at least 90 
                days.
        Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this 
        subtitle, the Secretary shall make recommendations regarding 
        the most appropriate duration of disability under this 
        paragraph.
            (3) Individuals with severe or profound mental 
        retardation.--An individual of any age who has severe or 
        profound mental retardation (as determined according to a 
        protocol specified by the Secretary).
            (4) Young children with severe disabilities.--An individual 
        under 6 years of age who--
                    (A) has a severe disability or chronic medical 
                condition that limits functioning in a manner that is 
                comparable in severity to the standards established 
                under paragraphs (1), (2), or (3), and
                    (B) is expected to have such a disability or 
                condition and require such services over a period of at 
                least 90 days.
    (b) Determination.--
            (1) In general.--In formulating eligibility criteria under 
        subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish criteria for 
        assessing the functional level of disability among all 
        categories of individuals with disabilities that are comparable 
        in severity, regardless of the age or the nature of the 
        disabling condition of the individual. The determination of 
        whether an individual is an individual with disabilities shall 
        be made by a public or nonprofit agency that is specified under 
        the State plan and that is not a provider of home and 
        community-based services under this subtitle and by using a 
        uniform protocol consisting of an initial screening and a 
        determination of disability specified by the Secretary. A State 
        may not impose cost sharing with respect to a determination of 
        disability. A State may collect additional information, at the 
        time of obtaining information to make such determination, in 
        order to provide for the assessment and plan described in 
        section 2104(b) or for other purposes.
            (2) Periodic reassessment.--The determination that an 
        individual is an individual with disabilities shall be 
        considered to be effective under the State plan for a period of 
        not more than 6 months (or for such longer period in such cases 
        as a significant change in an individual's condition that may 
        affect such determination is unlikely). A reassessment shall be 
        made if there is a significant change in an individual's 
        condition that may affect such determination.
    (c) Eligibility Criteria.--The Secretary shall reassess the 
validity of the eligibility criteria described in subsection (a) as new 
knowledge regarding the assessments of functional disabilities becomes 
available. The Secretary shall report to the Committees on Finance and 
Labor and Human Resources of the Senate and the Committees on Ways and 
Means and Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives on its 
findings under the preceding sentence as determined appropriate by the 
Secretary.
    (d) Activity of Daily Living Defined.--For purposes of this 
subtitle, the term `activity of daily living' means any of the 
following: eating, toileting, dressing, bathing, and transferring.

SEC. 2104. HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES COVERED UNDER STATE PLAN.

    (a) Specification.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
        this section, the State plan under this subtitle shall 
        specify--
                    (A) the home and community-based services available 
                under the plan to individuals with disabilities (or to 
                such categories of such individuals), and
                    (B) any limits with respect to such services.
            (2) Flexibility in meeting individual needs.--Subject to 
        subsection (e)(2), such services may be delivered in an 
        individual's home, a range of community residential 
        arrangements, or outside the home.
    (b) Requirement for Needs Assessment and Plan of Care.--
            (1) In general.--The State plan shall provide for home and 
        community-based services to an individual with disabilities 
        only if the following requirements are met:
                    (A) Comprehensive assessment.--A comprehensive 
                assessment of an individual's need for home and 
                community-based services (regardless of whether all 
                need services are available under the plan) shall be 
                made in accordance with a uniform, comprehensive 
                assessment tool that shall be used by a State under 
                this paragraph with the approval of the Secretary. The 
                Secretary shall provide guidance to the States with 
                regard to the appropriate qualifications for 
                individuals who conduct comprehensive assessments.
                    (B) Individualized plan of care.--An individualized 
                plan of care based on the assessment made under 
                subparagraph (A) shall be developed. A plan of care 
                under this subparagraph shall--
                            (i) specify which services included under 
                        the individual plan will be provided under the 
                        State plan under this subtitle;
                            (ii) identify (to the extent possible) how 
                        the individual will be provided any services 
                        specified under the plan of care and not 
                        provided under the State plan;
                            (iii) specify how the provision of services 
                        to the individual under the plan will be 
                        coordinated with the provision of other health 
                        care services to the individual; and
                            (iv) be reviewed and updated every 6 months 
                        (or more frequently if there is a change in the 
                        individual's condition).
                The State shall make reasonable efforts to identify and 
                arrange for services described in clause (ii). Nothing 
                in this subsection shall be construed as requiring a 
                State (under the State plan or otherwise) to provide 
                all the services specified in such a plan.
                    (C) Involvement of individuals.--The individualized 
                plan of care under subparagraph (B) for an individual 
                with disabilities shall--
                            (i) be developed by qualified individuals 
                        (specified under the State plan);
                            (ii) be developed and implemented in close 
                        consultation with the individual (or the 
                        individual's designated representative); and
                            (iii) be approved by the individual (or the 
                        individual's designated representative).
    (c) Requirement for Care Management.--
            (1) In general.--The State shall make available to each 
        category of individuals with disabilities care management 
        services that at a minimum include--
                    (A) arrangements for the provision of such 
                services, and
                    (B) monitoring of the delivery of services.
            (2) Care management services.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
                (B), the care management services described in 
                paragraph (1) shall be provided by a public or private 
                entity that is not providing home and community-based 
                services under this subtitle.
                    (B) Exception.--A person who provides home and 
                community-based services under this subtitle may 
                provide care management services if--
                            (i) the State determines that there is an 
                        insufficient pool of entities willing to 
                        provide such services in an area due to a low 
                        population of individuals eligible for home and 
                        community-based services under this subtitle 
                        residing in such area; and
                            (ii) the State plan specifies procedures 
                        that the State will implement in order to avoid 
                        conflicts of interest.
    (d) Mandatory Coverage of Personal Assistance Services.--The State 
plan shall include, in the array of services made available to each 
category of individuals with disabilities, both agency-administered and 
consumer-directed personal assistance services (as defined in 
subsection (h)).
    (e) Additional Services.--
            (1) Types of services.--Subject to subsection (f), services 
        available under a State plan under this subtitle may include 
        any (or all) of the following:
                    (A) Homemaker and chore assistance.
                    (B) Home modifications.
                    (C) Respite services.
                    (D) Assistive devices, as defined in the Technology 
                Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities 
                Act.
                    (E) Adult day services.
                    (F) Habilitation and rehabilitation.
                    (G) Supported employment.
                    (H) Home health services.
                    (I) Transportation.
                    (J) Any other care or assistive services specified 
                by the State and approved by the Secretary that will 
                help individuals with disabilities to remain in their 
                homes and communities.
            (2) Criteria for selection of services.--The State electing 
        services under paragraph (1) shall specify in the State plan--
                    (A) the methods and standards used to select the 
                types, and the amount, duration, and scope, of services 
                to be covered under the plan and to be available to 
                each category of individuals with disabilities, and
                    (B) how the types, and the amount, duration, and 
                scope, of services specified, within the limits of 
                available funding, provide substantial assistance in 
                living independently to individuals within each of the 
                categories of individuals with disabilities.
    (f) Exclusions and Limitations.--A State plan may not provide for 
coverage of--
            (1) room and board,
            (2) services furnished in a hospital, nursing facility, 
        intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or other 
        institutional setting specified by the Secretary, or
            (3) items and services to the extent coverage is provided 
        for the individual under a health plan or the medicare program.
    (g) Payment for Services.--In order to pay for covered services, a 
State plan may provide for the use of--
            (1) vouchers,
            (2) cash payments directly to individuals with 
        disabilities,
            (3) capitation payments to health plans, and
            (4) payment to providers.
    (h) Personal Assistance Services.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
        ``personal assistance services'' means those services specified 
        under the State plan as personal assistance services and shall 
        include at least hands-on and standby assistance, supervision, 
        and cueing with activities of daily living, whether agency-
        administered or consumer-directed (as defined in paragraph 
        (2)).
            (2) Consumer-directed.--For purposes of this subtitle:
                    (A) In general.--The term ``consumer-directed'' 
                means, with reference to personal assistance services 
                or the provider of such services, services that are 
                provided by an individual who is selected and managed 
                (and, at the option of the service recipient, trained) 
                by the individual receiving the services.
                    (B) State responsibilities.--A State plan shall 
                ensure that where services are provided in a consumer-
                directed manner, the State shall create or contract 
                with an entity, other than the consumer or the 
                individual provider, to--
                            (i) inform both recipients and providers of 
                        rights and responsibilities under all 
                        applicable Federal labor and tax law; and
                            (ii) assume responsibility for providing 
                        effective billing, payments for services, tax 
                        withholding, unemployment insurance, and 
                        workers' compensation coverage, and act as the 
                        employer of the home care provider.
                    (C) Right of consumers.--Notwithstanding the State 
                responsibilities described in subparagraph (B), service 
                recipients, and, where appropriate, their designated 
                representative, shall retain the right to independently 
                select, hire, terminate, and direct (including manage, 
                train, schedule, and verify services provided) the work 
                of a home care provider.
            (3) Agency administered.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
        the term `agency-administered' means, with respect to such 
        services, services that are not consumer-directed.

SEC. 2105. COST SHARING.

    (a) No Cost Sharing for Poorest.--
            (1) In general.--The State plan may not impose any cost 
        sharing for individuals with income (as determined under 
        subsection (d)) less than 150 percent of the official poverty 
        level (referred to in paragraph (2)) applicable to a family of 
        the size involved.
            (2) Official poverty level.--The term `applicable poverty 
        level' means, for a family for a year, the official poverty 
        line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and 
        revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the 
        Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a 
        family of the size involved.
    (b) Sliding Scale for Remainder.--
            (1) Required coinsurance.--The State plan shall impose cost 
        sharing in the form of coinsurance (based on the amount paid 
        under the State plan for a service)--
                    (A) at a rate of 10 percent for individuals with 
                disabilities with income not less than 150 percent, and 
                less than 175 percent, of such official poverty line 
                (as so applied);
                    (B) at a rate of 15 percent for such individuals 
                with income not less than 175 percent, and less than 
                225 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
                applied);
                    (C) at a rate of 25 percent for such individuals 
                with income not less than 225 percent, and less than 
                275 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
                applied);
                    (D) at a rate of 30 percent for such individuals 
                with income not less than 275 percent, and less than 
                325 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
                applied);
                    (E) at a rate of 35 percent for such individuals 
                with income not less than 325 percent, and less than 
                400 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
                applied); and
                    (F) at a rate of 40 percent for such individuals 
                with income equal to at least 400 percent of such 
                official poverty line (as so applied).
            (2) Required annual deductible.--The State plan shall 
        impose cost sharing in the form of an annual deductible--
                    (A) of $100 for individuals with disabilities with 
                income not less than 150 percent, and less than 175 
                percent, of such official poverty line (as so applied);
                    (B) of $200 for such individuals with income not 
                less than 175 percent, and less than 225 percent, of 
                such official poverty line (as so applied);
                    (C) of $300 for such individuals with income not 
                less than 225 percent, and less than 275 percent, of 
                such official poverty line (as so applied);
                    (D) of $400 for such individuals with income not 
                less than 275 percent, and less than 325 percent, of 
                such official poverty line (as so applied);
                    (E) of $500 for such individuals with income not 
                less than 325 percent, and less than 400 percent, of 
                such official poverty line (as so applied); and
                    (F) of $600 for such individuals with income equal 
                to at least 400 percent of such official poverty line 
                (as so applied).
    (c) Recommendation of the Secretary.--The Secretary shall make 
recommendations to the States as to how to reduce cost-sharing for 
individuals with extraordinary out-of-pocket costs for whom the cost-
sharing provisions of this section could jeopardize their ability to 
take advantage of the services offered under this subtitle. The 
Secretary shall establish a methodology for reducing the cost-sharing 
burden for individuals with exceptionally high out-of-pocket costs 
under this subtitle.
    (d) Determination of Income for Purposes of Cost Sharing.--The 
State plan shall specify the process to be used to determine the income 
of an individual with disabilities for purposes of this section. Such 
standards shall include a uniform Federal definition of income and any 
allowable deductions from income.

SEC. 2106. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND SAFEGUARDS.

    (a) Quality Assurance.--
            (1) In general.--The State plan shall specify how the State 
        will ensure and monitor the quality of services, including--
                    (A) safeguarding the health and safety of 
                individuals with disabilities,
                    (B) setting the minimum standards for agency 
                providers and how such standards will be enforced,
                    (C) setting the minimum competency requirements for 
                agency provider employees who provide direct services 
                under this subtitle and how the competency of such 
                employees will be enforced,
                    (D) obtaining meaningful consumer input, including 
                consumer surveys that measure the extent to which 
                participants receive the services described in the plan 
                of care and participant satisfaction with such 
                services,
                    (E) establishing a process to receive, investigate, 
                and resolve allegations of neglect and/or abuse,
                    (F) establishing optional training programs for 
                individuals with disabilities in the use and direction 
                of consumer directed providers of personal assistance 
                services,
                    (G) establishing an appeals procedure for 
                eligibility denials and a grievance procedure for 
                disagreements with the terms of an individualized plan 
                of care,
                    (H) providing for participation in quality 
                assurance activities, and
                    (I) specifying the role of the long-term care 
                ombudsman (under the Older Americans Act of 1965) and 
                the Protection and Advocacy Agency (under the 
                Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of 
                Rights Act) in assuring quality of services and 
                protecting the rights of individuals with disabilities.
            (2) Issuance of regulations.--Not later than 1 year after 
        the date of enactment of this subtitle, the Secretary shall 
        issue regulations implementing the quality provisions of this 
        subsection.
    (b) Federal Standards.--The State plan shall adhere to Federal 
quality standards in the following areas:
            (1) Case review of a specified sample of client records.
            (2) The mandatory reporting of abuse, neglect, or 
        exploitation.
            (3) The development of a registry of provider agencies or 
        home care workers and consumer directed providers of personal 
        assistance services against whom any complaints have been 
        sustained, which shall be available to the public.
            (4) Sanctions to be imposed on States or providers, 
        including disqualification from the program, if minimum 
        standards are not met.
            (5) Surveys of client satisfaction.
            (6) State optional training programs for informal 
        caregivers.
    (c) Client Advocacy.--
            (1) In general.--The State plan shall provide that the 
        State will expend the amount allocated under section 2109(b)(2) 
        for client advocacy activities. The State may use such funds to 
        augment the budgets of the long-term care ombudsman (under the 
        Older Americans Act of 1965) and the Protection and Advocacy 
        Agency (under the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and 
        Bill of Rights Act) or may establish a separate and independent 
        client advocacy office in accordance with paragraph (2) to 
        administer a new program designed to advocate for client 
        rights.
            (2) Client advocacy office.--
                    (A) In general.--A client advocacy office 
                established under this paragraph shall--
                            (i) identify, investigate, and resolve 
                        complaints that--
                                    (I) are made by, or on behalf of, 
                                clients; and
                                    (II) relate to action, inaction, or 
                                decisions, that may adversely affect 
                                the health, safety, welfare, or rights 
                                of the clients (including the welfare 
                                and rights of the clients with respect 
                                to the appointment and activities of 
                                guardians and representative payees), 
                                of--
                                            (aa) providers, or 
                                        representatives of providers, 
                                        of long-term care services;
                                            (bb) public agencies; or
                                            (cc) health and social 
                                        service agencies;
                            (ii) provide services to assist the clients 
                        in protecting the health, safety, welfare, and 
                        rights of the clients;
                            (iii) inform the clients about means of 
                        obtaining services provided by providers or 
                        agencies described in clause (i)(II) or 
                        services described in clause (ii);
                            (iv) ensure that the clients have regular 
                        and timely access to the services provided 
                        through the office and that the clients and 
                        complainants receive timely responses from 
                        representatives of the office to complaints; 
                        and
                            (v) represent the interests of the clients 
                        before governmental agencies and seek 
                        administrative, legal, and other remedies to 
                        protect the health, safety, welfare, and rights 
                        of the clients with regard to the provisions of 
                        this subtitle.
                    (B) Contracts and arrangements.--
                            (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clause (ii), the State agency may establish and 
                        operate the office, and carry out the program, 
                        directly, or by contract or other arrangement 
                        with any public agency or nonprofit private 
                        organization.
                    (C) Licensing and certification organizations; 
                associations.--The State agency may not enter into the 
                contract or other arrangement described in clause (i) 
                with an agency or organization that is responsible for 
                licensing, certifying, or providing long-term care 
                services in the State.
    (d) Safeguards.--
            (1) Confidentiality.--The State plan shall provide 
        safeguards which restrict the use or disclosure of information 
        concerning applicants and beneficiaries to purposes directly 
        connected with the administration of the plan.
            (2) Safeguards against abuse.--The State plans shall 
        provide safeguards against physical, emotional, or financial 
        abuse or exploitation (specifically including appropriate 
        safeguards in cases where payment for program benefits is made 
        by cash payments or vouchers given directly to individuals with 
        disabilities). All providers of services shall be required to 
        register with the State agency.
            (3) Regulations.--Not later than January 1, 1998, the 
        Secretary shall promulgate regulations with respect to the 
        requirements on States under this subsection.
    (e) Specified Rights.--The State plan shall provide that in 
furnishing home and community-based services under the plan the 
following individual rights are protected:
            (1) The right to be fully informed in advance, orally and 
        in writing, of the care to be provided, to be fully informed in 
        advance of any changes in care to be provided, and (except with 
        respect to an individual determined incompetent) to participate 
        in planning care or changes in care.
            (2) The right to--
                    (A) voice grievances with respect to services that 
                are (or fail to be) furnished without discrimination or 
                reprisal for voicing grievances,
                    (B) be told how to complain to State and local 
                authorities, and
                    (C) prompt resolution of any grievances or 
                complaints.
            (3) The right to confidentiality of personal and clinical 
        records and the right to have access to such records.
            (4) The right to privacy and to have one's property treated 
        with respect.
            (5) The right to refuse all or part of any care and to be 
        informed of the likely consequences of such refusal.
            (6) The right to education or training for oneself and for 
        members of one's family or household on the management of care.
            (7) The right to be free from physical or mental abuse, 
        corporal punishment, and any physical or chemical restraints 
        imposed for purposes of discipline or convenience and not 
        included in an individual's plan of care.
            (8) The right to be fully informed orally and in writing of 
        the individual's rights.
            (9) The right to a free choice of providers.
            (10) The right to direct provider activities when an 
        individual is competent and willing to direct such activities.

SEC. 2107. ADVISORY GROUPS.

    (a) Federal Advisory Group.--
            (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        advisory group, to advise the Secretary and States on all 
        aspects of the program under this subtitle.
            (2) Composition.--The group shall be composed of 
        individuals with disabilities and their representatives, 
        providers, Federal and State officials, and local community 
        implementing agencies. A majority of its members shall be 
        individuals with disabilities and their representatives.
    (b) State Advisory Groups.--
            (1) In general.--Each State plan shall provide for the 
        establishment and maintenance of an advisory group to advise 
        the State on all aspects of the State plan under this subtitle.
            (2) Composition.--Members of each advisory group shall be 
        appointed by the Governor (or other chief executive officer of 
        the State) and shall include individuals with disabilities and 
        their representatives, providers, State officials, and local 
        community implementing agencies. A majority of its members 
        shall be individuals with disabilities and their 
        representatives. The members of the advisory group shall be 
        selected from the those nominated as described in paragraph 
        (3).
            (3) Selection of members.--Each State shall establish a 
        process whereby all residents of the State, including 
        individuals with disabilities and their representatives, shall 
        be given the opportunity to nominate members to the advisory 
        group.
            (4) Particular concerns.--Each advisory group shall--
                    (A) before the State plan is developed, advise the 
                State on guiding principles and values, policy 
                directions, and specific components of the plan,
                    (B) meet regularly with State officials involved in 
                developing the plan, during the development phase, to 
                review and comment on all aspects of the plan,
                    (C) participate in the public hearings to help 
                assure that public comments are addressed to the extent 
                practicable,
                    (D) report to the Governor and make available to 
                the public any differences between the group's 
                recommendations and the plan,
                    (E) report to the Governor and make available to 
                the public specifically the degree to which the plan is 
                consumer-directed, and
                    (F) meet regularly with officials of the designated 
                State agency (or agencies) to provide advice on all 
                aspects of implementation and evaluation of the plan.

SEC. 2108. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

    (a) In General.--Subject to section 2102(a)(9)(C) (relating to 
limitation on payment for administrative costs), the Secretary, in 
accordance with the Cash Management Improvement Act, shall authorize 
payment to each State with a plan approved under this subtitle, for 
each quarter (beginning on or after January 1, 1998), from its 
allotment under section 2109(b), an amount equal to--
            (1)(A) if the amount demonstrated by State claims to have 
        been expended during the year for home and community-based 
        services under the plan for individuals with disabilities does 
        not exceed 20 percent of the amount allotted to the State under 
        section 2109(b), 100 percent of the amount demonstrated by 
        State claims to have been expended during the quarter for such 
        services for such individuals; or
            (B) for the amount demonstrated by State claims to have 
        been expended during the year for home and community-based 
        services under the plan for individuals with disabilities that 
        exceeds 20 percent of the amount allotted to the State under 
        section 2109(b), the Federal home and community-based services 
        matching percentage (as defined in subsection (b)) of such 
        amount; plus
            (2) an amount equal to 90 percent of the amount 
        demonstrated by the State to have been expended during the 
        quarter for quality assurance activities under the plan; plus
            (3) an amount equal to 90 percent of amount expended during 
        the quarter under the plan for activities (including 
        preliminary screening) relating to determination of eligibility 
        and performance of needs assessment; plus
            (4) an amount equal to 90 percent (or, beginning with 
        quarters in fiscal year 2004, 75 percent) of the amount 
        expended during the quarter for the design, development, and 
        installation of mechanical claims processing systems and for 
        information retrieval; plus
            (5) an amount equal to 50 percent of the remainder of the 
        amounts expended during the quarter as found necessary by the 
        Secretary for the proper and efficient administration of the 
        State plan.
    (b) Federal Home and Community-Based Services Matching 
Percentage.--In subsection (a), the term `Federal home and community-
based services matching percentage' means, with respect to a State, the 
State's Federal medical assistance percentage (as defined in section 
1905(b) of the Social Security Act) increased by 15 percentage points, 
except that the Federal home and community-based services matching 
percentage shall in no case be more than 95 percent.
    (c) Payments on Estimates with Retrospective Adjustments.--The 
method of computing and making payments under this section shall be as 
follows:
            (1) The Secretary shall, prior to the beginning of each 
        quarter, estimate the amount to be paid to the State under 
        subsection (a) for such quarter, based on a report filed by the 
        State containing its estimate of the total sum to be expended 
        in such quarter, and such other information as the Secretary 
        may find necessary.
            (2) From the allotment available therefore, the Secretary 
        shall provide for payment of the amount so estimated, reduced 
        or increased, as the case may be, by any sum (not previously 
        adjusted under this section) by which the Secretary finds that 
        the estimate of the amount to be paid the State for any prior 
        period under this section was greater or less than the amount 
        which should have been paid.
    (d) Application of Rules Regarding Limitations on Provider-Related 
Donations and Health Care Related Taxes.--The provisions of section 
1903(w) of the Social Security Act shall apply to payments to States 
under this section in the same manner as they apply to payments to 
States under section 1903(a) of such Act.
    (e) Failure to Comply with State Plan.--If a State furnishing home 
and community-based services under this subtitle fails to comply with 
the State plan approved under this subtitle, the Secretary may either 
reduce the Federal matching rates available to the State under 
subsection (a) or withhold an amount of funds determined appropriate by 
the Secretary from any payment to the State under this section.

SEC. 2109. APPROPRIATIONS; ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

    (a) Appropriations.--
            (1) Fiscal years 1998 through 2004.--Subject to paragraph 
        (5)(C), for purposes of this subtitle, the appropriation 
        authorized under this subtitle for each of fiscal years 1998 
        through 2004 is the following:
                    (A) For fiscal year 1998, $1,800,000,000.
                    (B) For fiscal year 1999, $2,900,000,000.
                    (C) For fiscal year 2000, $3,600,000,000.
                    (D) For fiscal year 2001, $5,000,000,000.
                    (E) For fiscal year 2002, $7,900,000,000.
                    (F) For fiscal year 2003, $11,400,000,000.
                    (G) For fiscal year 2004, $15,400,000,000.
            (2) Subsequent fiscal years.--For purposes of this 
        subtitle, the appropriation authorized for State plans under 
        this subtitle for each fiscal year after fiscal year 2004 is 
        the appropriation authorized under this subsection for the 
        preceding fiscal year multiplied by--
                    (A) a factor (described in paragraph (3)) 
                reflecting the change in the consumer price index for 
                the fiscal year, and
                    (B) a factor (described in paragraph (4)) 
                reflecting the change in the number of individuals with 
                disabilities for the fiscal year.
            (3) CPI increase factor.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(A), 
        the factor described in this paragraph for a fiscal year is the 
        ratio of--
                    (A) the annual average index of the consumer price 
                index for the preceding fiscal year, to--
                    (B) such index, as so measured, for the second 
                preceding fiscal year.
            (4) Disabled population factor.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (2)(B), the factor described in this paragraph for a fiscal 
        year is 100 percent plus (or minus) the percentage increase (or 
        decrease) change in the disabled population of the United 
        States (as determined for purposes of the most recent update 
        under subsection (b)(3)(D)).
            (5) Additional funds due to medicaid offsets.--
                    (A) In general.--Each participating State must 
                provide the Secretary with information concerning 
                offsets and reductions in the medicaid program 
                resulting from home and community-based services 
                provided disabled individuals under this subtitle, that 
                would have been paid for such individuals under the 
                State medicaid plan but for the provision of similar 
                services under the program under this subtitle. At the 
                time a State first submits its plan under this subtitle 
                and before each subsequent fiscal year (through fiscal 
                year 2004), the State also must provide the Secretary 
                with such budgetary information (for each fiscal year 
                through fiscal year 2004), as the Secretary determines 
                to be necessary to carry out this paragraph.
                    (B) Reports.--Each State with a program under this 
                subtitle shall submit such reports to the Secretary as 
                the Secretary may require in order to monitor 
                compliance with subparagraph (A). The Secretary shall 
                specify the format of such reports and establish 
                uniform data reporting elements.
                    (C) Adjustments to appropriation.--
                            (i) In general.--For each fiscal year 
                        (beginning with fiscal year 1998 and ending 
                        with fiscal year 2004) and based on a review of 
                        information submitted under subparagraph (A), 
                        the Secretary shall determine the amount by 
                        which the appropriation authorized under 
                        subsection (a) will increase. The amount of 
                        such increase for a fiscal year shall be 
                        limited to the reduction in Federal 
                        expenditures of medical assistance (as 
                        determined by Secretary) that would have been 
                        made under part A of title XIX for home and 
                        community based services for disabled 
                        individuals but for the provision of similar 
                        services under the program under this subtitle.
                            (ii) Annual publication.--The Secretary 
                        shall publish before the beginning of such 
                        fiscal year, the revised appropriation 
                        authorized under this subsection for such 
                        fiscal year.
                    (D) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
                be construed as requiring States to determine 
                eligibility for medical assistance under the State 
                medicaid plan on behalf of individuals receiving 
                assistance under this subtitle.
    (b) Allotments to States.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall allot the amounts 
        available under the appropriation authorized for the fiscal 
        year (specified in subsection (a)) to the States with plans 
        approved under this subtitle in accordance with an allocation 
        formula developed by the Secretary which takes into account--
                    (A) the percentage of the total number of 
                individuals with disabilities in all States that reside 
                in a particular State;
                    (B) the per capita costs of furnishing home and 
                community-based services to individuals with 
                disabilities in the State; and
                    (C) the percentage of all individuals with incomes 
                at or below 150 percent of the official poverty line 
                (as described in section 2105(a)(2)) in all States that 
                reside in a particular State.
            (2) Allocation for client advocacy activities.--Each State 
        with a plan approved under this subtitle shall allocate one-
        half of one percent of the State's total allotment under 
        paragraph (1) for client advocacy activities as described in 
        section 2106(c).
            (3) No duplicate payment.--No payment may be made to a 
        State under this section for any services provided to an 
        individual to the extent that the State received payment for 
        such services under section 1903(a) of the Social Security Act.
            (4) Reallocations.--Any amounts allotted to States under 
        this subsection for a year that are not expended in such year 
        shall remain available for State programs under this subtitle 
        and may be reallocated to States as the Secretary determines 
        appropriate.
    (c) State Entitlement.--This subtitle constitutes budget authority 
in advance of appropriations Acts, and represents the obligation of the 
Federal Government to provide for the payment to States of amounts 
described in subsection (a).

SEC. 2110. FEDERAL EVALUATIONS.

    (a) In General.--Not later than December 31, 2003, December 31, 
2006, and each December 31 thereafter, the Secretary shall provide to 
Congress analytical reports that evaluate--
            (1) the extent to which individuals with low incomes and 
        disabilities are equitably served;
            (2) the adequacy and equity of service plans to individuals 
        with similar levels of disability across States;
            (3) the comparability of program participation across 
        States, described by level and type of disability; and
            (4) the ability of service providers to sufficiently meet 
        the demand for services.
    (b) Geriatric Assessments.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
of enactment of this part, the Secretary shall report to Congress 
concerning the feasibility of providing reimbursement under health 
plans and other payers of health services for full geriatric 
assessment, when recommended by a physician.

PART 2--GRANTS RELATING TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOSPITAL LINKAGE PROGRAMS

SEC. 2111. INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS RELATING TO 
              DEVELOPMENT OF HOSPITAL LINKAGE PROGRAMS.

    (a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
            (1) demonstration programs and projects have been developed 
        to offer care management to hospitalized individuals awaiting 
        discharge who are in need of long-term health care services 
        that meet individual needs and preferences in home and 
        community-based settings as an alternative to long-term nursing 
        home care or institutional placement; and
            (2) there is a need to disseminate information and 
        technical assistance to hospitals and State and local community 
        organizations regarding such programs and projects and to 
        provide incentive grants to State and local public and private 
        agencies, including area agencies on aging, to establish and 
        expand programs that offer care management to individuals 
        awaiting discharge from acute care hospitals who are in need of 
        long-term care so that services to meet individual needs and 
        preferences can be arranged in home and community-based 
        settings as an alternative to long-term placement in nursing 
        homes or other institutional settings.
    (b) Dissemination of Information, Technical Assistance, and 
Incentive Grants to Assist in the Development of Hospital Linkage 
Programs.--Part C of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 248 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the 
following new section:

``SEC. 327B. DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
              INCENTIVE GRANTS TO ASSIST IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOSPITAL 
              LINKAGE PROGRAMS.

    ``(a) Dissemination of Information.--The Secretary shall compile, 
evaluate, publish and disseminate to appropriate State and local 
officials and to private organizations and agencies that provide 
services to individuals in need of long-term health care services, such 
information and materials as may assist such entities in replicating 
successful programs that are aimed at offering care management to 
hospitalized individuals who are in need of long-term care so that 
services to meet individual needs and preferences can be arranged in 
home and community-based settings as an alternative to long-term 
nursing home placement. The Secretary may provide technical assistance 
to entities seeking to replicate such programs.
    ``(b) Incentive Grants to Assist in the Development of Hospital 
Linkage Programs.--The Secretary shall establish a program under which 
incentive grants may be awarded to assist private and public agencies, 
including area agencies on aging, and organizations in developing and 
expanding programs and projects that facilitate the discharge of 
individuals in hospitals or other acute care facilities who are in need 
of long-term care services and placement of such individuals into home 
and community-based settings.
    ``(c) Administrative Provisions.--
            ``(1) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
        under subsection (b) an entity shall be--
                    ``(A)(i) a State agency as defined in section 
                102(43) of the Older Americans Act of 1965; or
                    ``(ii) a State agency responsible for administering 
                home and community care programs under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act; or
                    ``(B) if no State agency described in subparagraph 
                (A) applies with respect to a particular State, a 
                public or nonprofit private entity.
            ``(2) Applications.--To be eligible to receive an incentive 
        grant under subsection (b), an entity shall prepare and submit 
        to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner 
        and containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
        including--
                    ``(A) an assessment of the need within the 
                community to be served for the establishment or 
                expansion of a program to facilitate the discharge of 
                individuals in need of long-term care who are in 
                hospitals or other acute care facilities into home and 
                community-care programs that provide individually 
                planned, flexible services that reflect individual 
                choice or preference rather than nursing home or 
                institutional settings;
                    ``(B) a plan for establishing or expanding a 
                program for identifying individuals in hospital or 
                acute care facilities who are in need of individualized 
                long-term care provided in home and community-based 
                settings rather than nursing homes or other 
                institutional settings and undertaking the planning and 
                management of individualized care plans to facilitate 
                discharge into such settings;
                    ``(C) assurances that nongovernmental case 
                management agencies funded under grants awarded under 
                this section are not direct providers of home and 
                community-based services;
                    ``(D) satisfactory assurances that adequate home 
                and community-based long term care services are 
                available, or will be made available, within the 
                community to be served so that individuals being 
                discharged from hospitals or acute care facilities 
                under the proposed program can be served in such home 
                and community-based settings, with flexible, 
                individualized care which reflects individual choice 
                and preference;
                    ``(E) a description of the manner in which the 
                program to be administered with amounts received under 
                the grant will be continued after the termination of 
                the grant for which such application is submitted; and
                    ``(F) a description of any waivers or approvals 
                necessary to expand the number of individuals served in 
                federally funded home and community-based long term 
                care programs in order to provide satisfactory 
                assurances that adequate home and community-based long 
                term care services are available in the community to be 
                served.
            ``(3) Awarding of grants.--
                    ``(A) Preferences.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (b), the Secretary shall give preference to 
                entities submitting applications that--
                            ``(i) demonstrate an ability to coordinate 
                        activities funded using amounts received under 
                        the grant with programs providing 
                        individualized home and community-based case 
                        management and services to individuals in need 
                        of long term care with hospital discharge 
                        planning programs; and
                            ``(ii) demonstrate that adequate home and 
                        community-based long term care management and 
                        services are available, or will be made 
                        available to individuals being served under the 
                        program funded with amounts received under 
                        subsection (b).
                    ``(B) Distribution.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (b), the Secretary shall ensure that such 
                grants--
                            ``(i) are equitably distributed on a 
                        geographic basis;
                            ``(ii) include projects operating in urban 
                        areas and projects operating in rural areas; 
                        and
                            ``(iii) are awarded for the expansion of 
                        existing hospital linkage programs as well as 
                        the establishment of new programs.
                    ``(C) Expedited consideration.--The Secretary shall 
                provide for the expedited consideration of any waiver 
                application that is necessary under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act to enable an applicant for a grant 
                under subsection (b) to satisfy the assurance required 
                under paragraph (1)(D).
            ``(4) Use of grants.--An entity that receives amounts under 
        a grant under subsection (b) may use such amounts for planning, 
        development and evaluation services and to provide 
        reimbursements for the costs of one or more case mangers to be 
        located in or assigned to selected hospitals who would--
                    ``(A) identify patients in need of individualized 
                care in home and community-based long-term care;
                    ``(B) assess and develop care plans in cooperation 
                with the hospital discharge planning staff; and
                    ``(C) arrange for the provision of community care 
                either immediately upon discharge from the hospital or 
                after any short term nursing-home stay that is needed 
                for recuperation or rehabilitation;
            ``(5) Direct services subject to reimbursements.--None of 
        the amounts provided under a grant under this section may be 
        used to provide direct services, other than case management, 
        for which reimbursements are otherwise available under title 
        XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act.
            ``(6) Limitations.--
                    ``(A) Term.--Grants awarded under this section 
                shall be for terms of less than 3 years.
                    ``(B) Amount.--Grants awarded to an entity under 
                this section shall not exceed $300,000 per year. The 
                Secretary may waive the limitation under this 
                subparagraph where an applicant demonstrates that the 
                number of hospitals or individuals to be served under 
                the grant justifies such increased amounts.
                    ``(C) Supplanting of funds.--Amounts awarded under 
                a grant under this section may not be used to supplant 
                existing State funds that are provided to support 
                hospital link programs.
    ``(d) Evaluation and Reports.--
            ``(1) By grantees.--An entity that receives a grant under 
        this section shall evaluate the effectiveness of the services 
        provided under the grant in facilitating the placement of 
        individuals being discharged from hospitals or acute care 
        facilities into home and community-based long term care 
        settings rather than nursing homes. Such entity shall prepare 
        and submit to the Secretary a report containing such 
        information and data concerning the activities funded under the 
        grant as the Secretary determines appropriate.
            ``(2) By secretary.--Not later than the end of the third 
        fiscal year for which funds are appropriated under subsection 
        (e), the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate 
        committees of Congress, a report concerning the results of the 
        evaluations and reports conducted and prepared under paragraph 
        (1).
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $5,000,000 for each of the 
fiscal years 1994 through 1996.''.

  Subtitle C--Long-Term Care Insurance Improvement and Accountability

SEC. 2200. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Long-Term Care Insurance 
Improvement and Accountability Act''.

          PART 1--PROMULGATION OF STANDARDS AND MODEL BENEFITS

SEC. 2201. STANDARDS.

    (a) Application of Standards.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, shall develop and 
        publish specific standards to implement the standards specified 
        in this subtitle.
            (2) State standards.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
        construed as preventing a participating State from applying 
        standards that provide greater protection to insured 
        individuals under long-term care insurance policies than the 
        standards promulgated under this subtitle, except that such 
        State standards may not be inconsistent with any of the 
        standards specified in this subtitle.
    (b) Deadline for Application of Standards.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the date 
        specified in this subsection for a State is--
                    (A) the date the State adopts the standards 
                established under subsection (a)(1); or
                    (B) the date that is 1 year after the first day of 
                the first regular legislative session that begins after 
                the date such standards are first established under 
                subsection (a)(2);
        whichever is earlier.
            (2) State requiring legislation.--In the case of a State 
        which the Secretary identifies, in consultation with the NAIC, 
        as--
                    (A) requiring State legislation (other than 
                legislation appropriating funds) in order for the 
                standards established under subsection (a) to be 
                applied; but
                    (B) having a legislature which is not scheduled to 
                meet within 1 year following the beginning of the next 
                regular legislative session in which such legislation 
                may be considered;
        the date specified in this subsection is the first day of the 
        first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first 
        legislative session of the State legislature that begins on or 
        after January 1, 1995. For purposes of the previous sentence, 
        in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, 
        each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate 
        regular session of the State legislature.
    (c) Items Included in Standards.--The standards promulgated under 
subsection (a) shall include--
            (1) minimum Federal standards for long-term care insurance 
        consistent with the provisions of this subtitle;
            (2) standards for the enhanced protection of consumers with 
        long-term care insurance; and
            (3) procedures for the modification of the standards 
        established under paragraph (1) in a manner consistent with 
        future laws to expand existing Federal or State long-term care 
        benefits or establish a comprehensive Federal or State long-
        term care benefit program.
    (d) Consultation.--In establishing standards and models of benefits 
under this section, the Secretary shall, after consultation with 
representatives of carriers, consumer groups, and providers of long-
term care services--
            (1) recommend the appropriate inflationary index to be used 
        with respect to the inflation protection benefit portion of the 
        standards;
            (2) recommend the uniform needs assessment mechanism to be 
        used in determining the eligibility of individuals for benefits 
        under a policy;
            (3) recommend appropriate standards for the regulation of 
        the insurance aspects of supported housing arrangements; and
            (4) perform such other activities as determined appropriate 
        by the Secretary.

 PART 2--ESTABLISHMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE 
                            POLICY STANDARDS

SEC. 2211. IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY STANDARDS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Regulatory program.--No long-term care policy (as 
        defined in section (2221)) may be issued, sold, or offered for 
        sale as a long-term care insurance policy in a State on or 
        after the date specified in section 2201(b) unless--
                    (A) the Secretary determines that the State has 
                established a regulatory program that--
                            (i) provides for the application and 
                        enforcement of the standards established under 
                        section 2201(a); and
                            (ii) complies with the requirements of 
                        subsection (b);
                by the date specified in section 2201(b), and the 
                policy has been approved by the State commissioner or 
                superintendent of insurance under such program; or
                    (B) if the State has not established such a 
                program, or if the State's regulatory program has been 
                decertified, the policy has been certified by the 
                Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the 
                Secretary may establish) as meeting the standards 
                established under section 2201(a) by the date specified 
                in section 2201(b).
        For purposes of this subsection, the advertising or soliciting 
        with respect to a policy, directly or indirectly, shall be 
        deemed the offering for sale of the policy.
            (2) Review of state regulatory programs.--The Secretary 
        shall review regulatory programs described in paragraph (1)(A) 
        at least biannually to determine if they continue to provide 
        for the application and enforcement of the standards and 
        procedures established under section 2201(a) and (b). If the 
        Secretary determines that a State regulatory program no longer 
        meets such standards and requirements, before making a final 
        determination, the Secretary shall provide the State an 
        opportunity to adopt such a plan of correction as would permit 
        the program to continue to meet such standards and 
        requirements. If the Secretary makes a final determination that 
        the State regulatory program, after such an opportunity, fails 
        to meet such standards and requirements, the Secretary shall 
        assume responsibility under paragraph (1)(B) with respect to 
        certifying policies in the State and shall exercise full 
        authority under section 2201 for carriers, agents, or 
        associations or its subsidiary in the State plans in the State.
    (b) Additional Requirements for Approval of State Regulatory 
Programs.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)(ii), the requirements 
of this subsection for a State regulatory program are as follows:
            (1) Enforcement.--The enforcement under the program--
                    (A) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure 
                compliance with the standards within 30 days after the 
                date of a finding of noncompliance with such standards; 
                and
                    (B) shall provide for notice in the annual report 
                required under paragraph (5) to the Secretary of cases 
                where such compliance is not secured within such 30-day 
                period.
            (2) Process.--The enforcement process under each State 
        regulatory program shall provide for--
                    (A) procedures for individuals and entities to file 
                written, signed complaints respecting alleged 
                violations of the standards;
                    (B) responding to such complaints within 90 days;
                    (C) the investigation of--
                            (i) those complaints which have a 
                        reasonable probability of validity; and
                            (ii) such other alleged violations of the 
                        standards as the program finds appropriate; and
                    (D) the imposition of appropriate sanctions (which 
                include, in appropriate cases, the imposition of a 
                civil money penalty as provided for in section 2218) in 
                the case of a carrier, agent, or association or its 
                subsidiary determined to have violated the standards.
            (3) Private actions.--An individual may commence a civil 
        action in an appropriate State or United States district court 
        to enforce the provisions of this title and may be awarded 
        appropriate relief and reasonable attorney's fees.
            (4) Consumer access to compliance information.--
                    (A) In general.--A State regulatory program shall 
                provide for consumer access to complaints filed with 
                the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance 
                with respect to long-term care insurance policies.
                    (B) Confidentiality.--The access provided under 
                subparagraph (A) shall be limited to the extent 
                required to protect the confidentiality of the identity 
                of individual policyholders.
            (5) Process for approval of premiums.--
                    (A) In general.--Each State regulatory program 
                shall--
                            (i) provide for a process for approving or 
                        disapproving proposed premium increases or 
                        decreases with respect to long-term care 
                        insurance policies; and
                            (ii) establish a policy for receipt and 
                        consideration of public comments before 
                        approving such a premium increase or decrease.
                    (B) Conditions for approval.--No premium increase 
                shall be approved (or deemed approved) under 
                subparagraph (A) unless the proposed increase is 
                accompanied by an actuarial memorandum which--
                            (i) includes a description of the 
                        assumptions that justify the increase, 
                        including a financial report on expenditures;
                            (ii) contains such information as may be 
                        required under the Standards; and
                            (iii) is made available to the public.
                    (C) Application.--Except as provided in 
                subparagraph (D), this paragraph shall not apply to a 
                group long-term care insurance policy issued to a group 
                described in section 4(E)(1) of the NAIC Long Term Care 
                Insurance Model Act (effective January 1991), except 
                that such group policy shall, pursuant to guidelines 
                developed by the NAIC, provide notice to policyholders 
                and certificate holders of any premium change under 
                such group policy.
                    (D) Exception.--Subparagraph (C) shall not apply 
                to--
                            (i) group conversion policies;
                            (ii) the group continuation feature of a 
                        group policy if the insurer separately rates 
                        employee and continuation coverages; and
                            (iii) group policies where the function of 
                        the employer is limited solely to collecting 
                        premiums (through payroll deductions or dues 
                        checkoff) and remitting them to the insurer.
                    (E) Construction.--Nothing in this paragraph shall 
                be construed as preventing the Secretary, in 
                consultation with the NAIC, from promulgating 
                standards, or a State from enacting and enforcing laws, 
                with respect to premium rates or loss ratios for all, 
                including group, long-term care insurance policies.
            (6) Annual reports.--Each State regulatory program shall 
        provide for annual reports to be submitted to the Secretary on 
        the implementation and enforcement of the standards in the 
        State, including information concerning violations in excess of 
        30 days.
            (7) Access to other information.--The State regulatory 
        program shall provide for consumer access to actuarial 
        memoranda, including financial information, provided under 
        paragraph (4).
            (8) Default.--In the case of a State without a regulatory 
        program approved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
        provide for the enforcement activities described in subsection 
        (c).
    (c) Secretarial Enforcement Authority.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall exercise authority 
        under this section in the case of a State that does not have a 
        regulatory program approved under this section.
            (2) Complaints and investigations.--The Secretary shall 
        establish procedures--
                    (A) for individuals and entities to file written, 
                signed complaints respecting alleged violations of the 
                requirements of this subtitle;
                    (B) for responding on a timely basis to such 
                complaints; and
                    (C) for the investigation of--
                            (i) those complaints that have a reasonable 
                        probability of validity; and
                            (ii) such other alleged violations of the 
                        requirements of this subtitle as the Secretary 
                        determines to be appropriate.
        In conducting investigations under this subsection, agents of 
        the Secretary shall have reasonable access necessary to enable 
        such agents to examine evidence of any carrier, agent, or 
        association or its subsidiary being investigated.
            (3) Hearings.--
                    (A) In general.--Prior to imposing an order 
                described in paragraph (4) against a carrier, agent, or 
                association or its subsidiary under this section for a 
                violation of the requirements of this subtitle, the 
                Secretary shall provide the carrier, agent, association 
                or subsidiary with notice and, upon request made within 
                a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days, as 
                established by the Secretary by regulation) of the date 
                of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
                    (B) Conduct of hearing.--Any hearing requested 
                under subparagraph (A) shall be conducted before an 
                administrative law judge. If no hearing is so 
                requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order 
                shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
                    (C) Authority in hearings.--In conducting hearings 
                under this paragraph--
                            (i) agents of the Secretary and 
                        administrative law judges shall have reasonable 
                        access necessary to enable such agents and 
                        judges to examine evidence of any carrier, 
                        agent, or association or its subsidiary being 
                        investigated; and
                            (ii) administrative law judges, may, if 
                        necessary, compel by subpoena the attendance of 
                        witnesses and the production of evidence at any 
                        designated place or hearing.
                In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena 
                lawfully issued under this subparagraph and upon 
                application of the Secretary, an appropriate district 
                court of the United States may issue an order requiring 
                compliance with such subpoena and any failure to obey 
                such order may be punished by such court as a contempt 
                thereof.
                    (D) Issuance of orders.--If an administrative law 
                judge determines in a hearing under this paragraph, 
                upon the preponderance of the evidence received, that a 
                carrier, agent, or association or its subsidiary named 
                in the complaint has violated the requirements of this 
                subtitle, the administrative law judge shall state the 
                findings of fact and issue and cause to be served on 
                such carrier, agent, association, or subsidiary an 
                order described in paragraph (4).
            (4) Cease and desist order with civil money penalty.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to the provisions of 
                subparagraphs (B) through (F), an order under this 
                paragraph--
                            (i) shall require the agent, association or 
                        its subsidiary, or a carrier--
                                    (I) to cease and desist from such 
                                violations; and
                                    (II) to pay a civil penalty in an 
                                amount not to exceed $15,000 in the 
                                case of each agent, and not to exceed 
                                $25,000 for each association or its 
                                subsidiary or a carrier for each such 
                                violation; and
                            (ii) may require the agent, association or 
                        its subsidiary, or a carrier to take such other 
                        remedial action as is appropriate.
                    (B) Corrections within 30 days.--No order shall be 
                imposed under this paragraph by reason of any violation 
                if the carrier, agent, or association or its subsidiary 
                establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary that--
                            (i) such violation was due to reasonable 
                        cause and was not intentional and was not due 
                        to willful neglect; and
                            (ii) such violation is corrected within the 
                        30-day period beginning on the earliest date 
                        the carrier, agent, association, or subsidiary 
                        knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could 
                        have known, that such a violation was 
                        occurring.
                    (C) Waiver by secretary.--In the case of a 
                violation under this subtitle that is due to reasonable 
                cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may 
                waive part or all of the civil money penalty imposed 
                under subparagraph (A)(i)(II) to the extent that 
                payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive 
                relative to the violation involved and to the need for 
                deterrence of violations.
                    (D) Administrative appellate review.--The decision 
                and order of an administrative law judge under this 
                paragraph shall become the final agency decision and 
                order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the 
                Secretary modifies or vacates the decision and order, 
                in which case the decision and order of the Secretary 
                shall become a final order under this paragraph.
                    (E) Judicial review.--A carrier, agent, or 
                association or its subsidiary or any other individual 
                adversely affected by a final order issued under this 
                paragraph may, within 45 days after the date the final 
                order is issued, file a petition in the Court of 
                Appeals for the appropriate circuit for review of the 
                order.
                    (F) Enforcement of orders.--If a carrier, agent, or 
                association or its subsidiary fails to comply with a 
                final order issued under this paragraph against the 
                carrier, agent, association or subsidiary after 
                opportunity for judicial review under subparagraph (E), 
                the Secretary shall file a suit to seek compliance with 
                the order in any appropriate district court of the 
                United States. In any such suit, the validity and 
                appropriateness of the final order shall not be subject 
                to review.

SEC. 2212. REGULATION OF SALES PRACTICES.

    (a) Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing.--
            (1) In general.--Each agent (as defined in section 2233) or 
        association that is selling or offering for sale a long-term 
        care insurance policy has the duty of good faith and fair 
        dealing to the purchaser or potential purchaser of such a 
        policy.
            (2) Policy replacement form.--With respect to any 
        individual who elects to replace or effect a change in a long-
        term care insurance policy, the individual that is selling such 
        policy shall ensure that such individual completes a policy 
        replacement form developed by the Secretary, in consultation 
        with the NAIC. A copy of such form shall be provided to such 
        individual and additional copies shall be delivered by the 
        selling individual to the old policy issuer and the new issuer 
        and kept on file for inspection by the State regulatory agency.
            (3) Prohibited practices.--An agent or association is 
        considered to have violated paragraph (1) if the agent or 
        association engages in any of the following practices:
                    (A) Twisting.--Knowingly making any misleading 
                representation (including the inaccurate completion of 
                medical histories) or incomplete or fraudulent 
                comparison of any long-term care insurance policy or 
                insurers for the purpose of inducing, or tending to 
                induce, any individual to retain or effect a change 
                with respect to a long-term care insurance policy.
                    (B) High pressure tactics.--Employing any method of 
                marketing having the effect of, or intending to, induce 
                the purchase of long-term care insurance policy through 
                force, fright, threat or undue pressure, whether 
                explicit or implicit.
                    (C) Cold lead advertising.--Making use directly or 
                indirectly of any method of marketing which fails to 
                disclose in a conspicuous manner that a purpose of the 
                method of marketing is solicitation of insurance and 
                that contact will be made by an insurance agent or 
                insurance company.
                    (D) Others.--Engaging in such other practices 
                determined inappropriate under guidelines issued by the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC.
    (b) Financial Needs Standards.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
the NAIC, shall develop recommended minimum financial needs standards 
(including both income and asset criteria) for the purpose of advising 
individuals as to the costs and amounts of insurance needed when 
considering the purchase of a long-term care insurance policy.
    (c) Prohibition of Sale or Issuance to Medicaid Beneficiaries.--An 
agent, an association, or a carrier may not knowingly sell or issue a 
long-term care insurance policy to an individual who is eligible for 
medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
    (d) Prohibition of Sale or Issuance of Duplicate Service Benefit 
Policies.--An agent, association or its subsidiary, or a carrier may 
not sell or issue a service-benefit long-term care insurance policy to 
an individual--
            (1) knowing that the policy provides for coverage that 
        duplicates coverage already provided in another service-benefit 
        long-term care insurance policy held by such individual (unless 
        the policy is intended to replace such other policy); or
            (2) for the benefit of an individual unless the individual 
        (or a representative of the individual) provides a written 
        statement to the effect that the coverage--
                    (A) does not duplicate other coverage in effect 
                under a service-benefit long-term care insurance 
                policy; or
                    (B) will replace another service-benefit long-term 
                care insurance policy.
In this subsection, the term ``service-benefit long-term care insurance 
policy'' means a long-term care insurance policy which provides for 
benefits based on the type and amount of services furnished.
    (e) Prohibition Based on Eligibility for Other Benefits.--A carrier 
may not sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy that reduces, 
limits, or coordinates the benefits provided under the policy on the 
basis that the policyholder has or is eligible for other long-term care 
insurance coverage or benefits.
    (f) Provision of Outline of Coverage.--No agent, association or its 
subsidiary, or carrier may sell or offer for sale a long-term care 
insurance policy without providing to every individual purchaser or 
potential purchaser (or representative) an outline of coverage that 
complies with the standards established under section 2201(a).
    (g) Penalties.--Any agent who sells, offers for sale, or issues a 
long-term care insurance policy in violation of this section may be 
imprisoned not more than 5 years, or fined in accordance with title 18, 
United States Code, and, in addition, is subject to a civil money 
penalty of not to exceed $15,000 for each such violation. Any 
association or its subsidiary or carrier that sells, offers for sale, 
or issues a long-term care insurance policy in violation of this 
section may be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, 
and in addition, is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed 
$25,000 for each violation. Nothing in this subsection shall be 
construed as preempting or otherwise limiting the penalties that may be 
imposed by a State for conduct that violates this section.
    (h) Agent Training and Certification Requirements.--The Secretary, 
in consultation with the NAIC, shall establish requirements for long-
term care insurance agent training and certification that--
            (1) specify requirements for training insurance agents who 
        desire to sell or offer for sale long-term care insurance 
        policies; and
            (2) specify procedures for certifying and recertifying 
        agents who have completed such training and who are qualified 
        to sell or offer for sale long-term care insurance policies.

SEC. 2213. ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CARRIERS.

    (a) Refund of Premiums.--If an application for a long-term care 
insurance policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care 
insurance policy) is denied or an applicant returns a policy or 
certificate within 30 days of the date of its issuance pursuant to 
subsection 2217, the carrier shall, not later than 30 days after the 
date of the denial or return, refund directly to the applicant, or in 
the case of an employer to whomever remits the premium, any premiums 
paid with respect to such a policy (or certificate). Any such refund 
shall not be made by delivery by the carrier.
    (b) Mailing of Policy.--If an application for a long-term care 
insurance policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care 
insurance policy) is approved, the carrier shall provide each 
individual applicant the policy (or certificate) of insurance and 
outline of coverage not later than 30 days after the date of the 
approval.
    (c) Information on Denials of Claims.--If a claim under a long-term 
care insurance policy is denied, the carrier shall, within 15 days of 
the date of a written request by the policyholder or certificate holder 
(or representative)--
            (1) provide a written explanation of the reasons for the 
        denial;
            (2) make available all medical and patient records directly 
        relating to such denial; and
            (3) provide a written explanation of the manner in which to 
        appeal the denial.
Except as provided in subsection (e) of section 2215, no claim under 
such a policy may be denied on the basis of a failure to disclose a 
condition at the time of issuance of the policy if the application for 
the policy failed to request information respecting the condition.
    (d) Reporting of Information.--A carrier that issues one or more 
long-term care insurance policies shall periodically (not less often 
than annually) report, in a form and in a manner determined by the 
Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, to the Commissioner, 
superintendent or director of insurance of each State in which the 
policy is delivered, and shall make available to the Secretary, upon 
request, information in a form and manner determined by the Secretary, 
in consultation with the NAIC, concerning--
            (1) the long-term care insurance policies of the carrier 
        that are in force;
            (2) the most recent premiums for such policies and the 
        premiums imposed for such policies since their initial 
        issuance;
            (3) the lapse rate, replacement rate, and rescission rates 
        by policy;
            (4) the names of that 10 percent of its agents that--
                    (A) have the greatest lapse and replacement rate; 
                and
                    (B) have produced at least $50,000 of long-term 
                care insurance sales in the previous year; and
            (5) the claims denied (expressed as a number and as a 
        percentage of claims submitted) by policy.
Information required under this subsection shall be reported in a 
format specified in the standards established under section 2201(a). 
For purposes of paragraph (3), there shall be included (but reported 
separately) data concerning lapses due to the death of the 
policyholder. For purposes of paragraph (4), there shall not be 
included as a claim any claim that is denied solely because of the 
failure to meet a deductible, waiting period, or exclusionary period.
    (e) Standards on Compensation for Sale of Policies.--
            (1) In general.--Until the Secretary, in consultation with 
        the NAIC, promulgates mandatory standards concerning 
        compensation for the sale of long-term care policies, a carrier 
        that issues one or more long-term care insurance policies may 
        provide a commission or other compensation to an agent or other 
        representative for the sale of such a policy only if the first 
        year commission or other first year compensation to be paid 
        does not exceed--
                    (A) 200 percent of the commission or other 
                compensation paid for selling or servicing the policy 
                in the second year, or
                    (B) 50 percent of the premium paid on the first 
                year policy.
            (2) Subsequent years.--The commission or other compensation 
        provided for the sale of long-term care policies to an 
        individual during each of the years during the 5-year period 
        subsequent to the first year of the policy shall be the same as 
        that provided in the second subsequent year.
            (3) Limitation.--No carrier shall provide compensation to 
        its agents for the sale of a long-term care policy which 
        replaces an existing policy, and no agent shall receive 
        compensation for such sale greater than the renewal 
        compensation payable by the replacing carrier on renewal 
        policies.
            (4) Compensation defined.--As used in this subsection, the 
        term ``compensation'' includes pecuniary or nonpecuniary 
        remuneration of any kind relating to the sale or renewal of the 
        policy, including, but not limited to, deferred compensation, 
        bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders fees.

SEC. 2214. RENEWABILITY STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE, AND BASIS FOR 
              CANCELLATION OF POLICIES.

    (a) In General.--No long-term care insurance policy may be canceled 
or nonrenewed for any reason other than nonpayment of premium, material 
misrepresentation, or fraud.
    (b) Continuation and Conversion Rights for Group Policies.--
            (1) In general.--Each group long-term care insurance policy 
        shall provide covered individuals with a basis for continuation 
        or conversion in accordance with this subsection.
            (2) Basis for continuation.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
        a policy provides a basis for continuation of coverage if the 
        policy maintains coverage under the existing group policy when 
        such coverage would otherwise terminate and which is subject 
        only to the continued timely payment of premiums when due. A 
        group policy which restricts provision of benefits and services 
        to, or contains incentives to use certain providers or 
        facility, may provide continuation benefits which are 
        substantially equivalent to the benefits of the existing group 
        policy.
            (3) Basis for conversion.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a 
        policy provides a basis for conversion of coverage if the 
        policy entitles each individual--
                    (A) whose coverage under the group policy would 
                otherwise be terminated for any reason; and
                    (B) who has been continuously insured under the 
                policy (or group policy which was replaced) for at 
                least 6 months before the date of the termination;
        to issuance of a policy providing benefits not less than, 
        substantially equivalent to, or in excess of, those of the 
        policy being terminated, without evidence of insurability.
            (4) Treatment of substantial equivalence.--In determining 
        under this subsection whether benefits are substantially 
        equivalent, consideration should be given to the difference 
        between managed care and non-managed care plans.
            (5) Group replacement of policies.--If a group long-term 
        care insurance policy is replaced by another long-term care 
        insurance policy purchased by the same policyholder, the 
        succeeding issuer shall offer coverage to all individuals 
        covered under the old group policy on its date of termination. 
        Coverage under the new group policy shall not result in any 
        exclusion for preexisting conditions that would have been 
        covered under the group policy being replaced.
    (c) Standards for Issuance.--
            (1) In general.--
                    (A) Guarantee.--An agent, association or carrier 
                that sells or issues long-term care insurance policies 
                shall guarantee that such policies shall be sold or 
                issued to an individual, or eligible individual in the 
                case of a group plan, if such individual meets the 
                minimum medical underwriting requirements of such 
                policy.
                    (B) Premium for converted policy.--If a group 
                policy from which conversion is made is a replacement 
                for a previous group policy, the premium for the 
                converted policy shall be calculated on the basis of 
                the insured's age at the inception of coverage under 
                the group policy from which conversion is made. Where 
                the group policy from which conversion is made replaced 
                previous group coverage, the premium for the converted 
                policy shall be calculated on the basis of the 
                insured's age at inception of coverage under the group 
                policy replaced.
            (2) Upgrade for current policies.--The Secretary, in 
        consultation with the NAIC, shall establish standards, 
        including those providing guidance on medical underwriting and 
        age rating, with respect to the access of individuals to 
        policies offering upgraded benefits.
            (3) Rate stabilization.--The Secretary, in consultation 
        with the NAIC, shall establish standards for premium rate 
        stabilization.
    (d) Effect of Incapacitation.--
            (1) In general.--
                    (A) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph 
                (2), a long-term care insurance policy in effect as of 
                the effective date of the standards established under 
                section 2201(a) may not be canceled for nonpayment if 
                the policy holder is determined by a long-term care 
                provider, physician, or other health care provider 
                (independent of the issuer of the policy), to be 
                cognitively or mentally incapacitated so as to not make 
                payments in a timely manner.
                    (B) Reinstatement.--A long-term care policy shall 
                include a provision that provides for the reinstatement 
                of such coverage, in the event of lapse, if the insurer 
                is provided with proof of cognitive or mental 
                incapacitation. Such reinstatement option shall remain 
                available for a period of not less than 5 months after 
                termination and shall allow for the collection of past 
                due premium.
            (2) Permitted cancellation.--A long-term care insurance 
        policy may be canceled under paragraph (1) for nonpayment if--
                    (A) the period of such nonpayment is in excess of 
                30 days; and
                    (B) notice of intent to cancel is provided to the 
                policyholder or designated representative of the policy 
                holder not less than 30 days prior to such 
                cancellation, except that notice may not be provided 
                until the expiration of 30 days after a premium is due 
                and unpaid.
        Notice under this paragraph shall be deemed to have been given 
        as of 5 days after the mailing date.

SEC. 2215. BENEFIT STANDARDS.

    (a) Use of Standard Definitions and Terminology, Uniform Format, 
and Standard Benefits.--Pursuant to standards established under section 
2201(a), each long-term care insurance policy shall, with respect to 
services, providers or facilities--
            (1) use uniform language and definitions, except that such 
        language and definitions may take into account the differences 
        between States with respect to definitions and terminology used 
        for long-term care services and providers; and
            (2) use a uniform format for presenting the outline of 
        coverage under such a policy;
as prescribed under guidelines issued by the Secretary, in consultation 
with the NAIC, and periodically updated.
    (b) Disclosure.--
            (1) Outline of coverage.--
                    (A) Requirement.--Each carrier that sells or offers 
                for sale a long-term care insurance policy shall 
                provide an outline of coverage to each individual 
                policyholder under such policy that meets the 
                applicable standards established pursuant to section 
                2201(a), complies with the requirements of subparagraph 
                (B), and is in a uniform format as prescribed in 
                guidelines issued by the Secretary, in consultation 
                with the NAIC, and periodically updated.
                    (B) Contents.--The outline of coverage for each 
                long-term care policy shall substantially and 
                accurately reflect the contents of the policy or the 
                master policy and shall include at least the following:
                            (i) A description of the benefits and 
                        coverage under the policy.
                            (ii) A statement of the exclusions, 
                        reductions, and limitations contained in the 
                        policy.
                            (iii) A statement of the terms under which 
                        the policy (or certificate) may be continued in 
                        force or discontinued, the terms for 
                        continuation or conversion, and any reservation 
                        in the policy of a right to change premiums.
                            (iv) Consumer protection information, 
                        including the manner in which to file a claim 
                        and to register complaints.
                            (v) A statement, in bold face type on the 
                        face of the document in language that is 
                        understandable to an average individual, that 
                        the outline of coverage is a summary only and 
                        not a contract of insurance, and that the 
                        policy (or master policy) contains the 
                        contractual provisions that govern.
                            (vi) A description of the terms, specified 
                        in section 2217, under which a policy or 
                        certificate may be returned and premium 
                        refunded.
                            (vii) Information on--
                                    (I) national average costs for 
                                nursing facility and home health care 
                                and information (in graph form) on the 
                                relationship of the value of the 
                                benefits provided under the policy to 
                                such national average costs and State 
                                average costs; and
                                    (II) other public and private long-
                                term care insurance products and long-
                                term care programs where made available 
                                by the Federal Government or by a State 
                                government.
                            (viii) A statement of the percentage limit 
                        on annual premium increases that is provided 
                        under the policy pursuant to this section.
            (2) Certificates.--A certificate issued pursuant to a group 
        long-term care insurance policy shall include--
                    (A) a description of the principal benefits and 
                coverage provided in the policy;
                    (B) a statement of the principal exclusions, 
                reductions, and limitations contained in the policy; 
                and
                    (C) a statement that the group master policy 
                determines governing contractual provisions.
            (3) Long-term care as part of life insurance.--In the case 
        of a long-term care insurance policy issued as a part of, or a 
        rider on, a life insurance policy, at the time of policy 
        delivery there shall be provided a policy summary that 
        includes--
                    (A) an explanation of how the long-term care 
                benefits interact with other components of the policy 
                (including deductions from death benefits);
                    (B) an illustration of the amount of benefits, the 
                length of benefits, and the guaranteed lifetime 
                benefits (if any) for each covered individual; and
                    (C) any exclusions, reductions, and limitations on 
                benefits of long-term care.
            (4) Additional information.--The Secretary, in consultation 
        with the NAIC shall develop recommendations with respect to 
        informing consumers of the long-term economic viability of 
        carriers issuing long-term care insurance policies.
    (c) Limiting Conditions on Benefits; Minimum Benefits.--
            (1) In general.--A long-term care insurance policy may not 
        condition or limit eligibility--
                    (A) for benefits for a type of services to the need 
                for or receipt of any other services;
                    (B) for any benefit on the medical necessity for 
                such benefit;
                    (C) for benefits furnished by licensed or certified 
                providers in compliance with conditions which are in 
                addition to those required for licensure or 
                certification under State law, or if no State licensure 
                or certification laws exists, developed by the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC; or
                    (D) for residential care (if covered under the 
                policy) only--
                            (i) to care provided in facilities which 
                        provide a higher level of care; or
                            (ii) to care provided in facilities which 
                        provide for 24-hour or other nursing care not 
                        required in order to be licensed by the State.
            (2) Home health care or community-based services.--If a 
        long-term care insurance policy provides benefits for the 
        payment of specified home health care or community-based 
        services, the policy--
                    (A) may not limit such benefits to services 
                provided by registered nurses or licensed practical 
                nurses;
                    (B) may not require benefits for such services to 
                be provided by a nurse or therapist that can be 
                provided by a home health aide or a home care worker 
                who is licensed or certified under State licensure or 
                certification laws, or if no such laws exist, who is in 
                compliance with qualifications developed by the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC;
                    (C) may not limit such benefits to services 
                provided by agencies or providers certified under title 
                XVIII of the Social Security Act; and
                    (D) shall provide, at a minimum--
                            (i) benefits for personal care services 
                        (including home health aide and home care 
                        worker services as defined by the Secretary, in 
                        consultation with the NAIC), home health 
                        services, adult day care, and respite care in 
                        an individual's home or in another setting in 
                        the community; or
                            (ii) any of such benefits on a respite care 
                        basis.
            (3) Nursing facility services.--If a long-term care policy 
        provides benefits for the payment of specified nursing facility 
        services, the policy shall provide such benefits with respect 
        to all nursing facilities in the State. Except as provided by 
        the Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, under uniform 
        language and definitions established under section 2215(a)(1)), 
        the term `nursing facilities' has the meaning given such term 
        by section 1919(a) of the Social Security Act.
            (4) Per diem policies.--
                    (A) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
                term ``per diem long-term care insurance policy'' means 
                a long-term care insurance policy (or certificate under 
                a group long-term care insurance policy) that provides 
                for benefit payments on a periodic basis due to 
                cognitive impairment or loss of functional capacity 
                without regard to the expenses incurred or services 
                rendered during the period to which the payments 
                relate.
                    (B) Limitation.--No per diem long-term care 
                insurance policy (or certificate) may condition, limit 
                or otherwise exclude benefit payments based on the 
                receipt of any type services from any type providers of 
                long-term care service providers.
    (d) Prohibition of Discrimination.--A long-term care insurance 
policy may not, with respect to benefits under the policy, treat an 
individual with Alzheimer's disease, with any related progressive 
degenerative dementia of an organic origin, with any organic or 
inorganic mental illness, or with mental retardation or any other 
cognitive or mental impairment, differently from an individual having a 
functional impairment for which such benefits may be made available.
    (e) Limitation on Use of Preexisting Condition Limits.--
            (1) Initial issuance.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
                long-term care insurance policy may not exclude or 
                condition benefits based on a medical condition for 
                which the policyholder received treatment or was 
                otherwise diagnosed before the issuance of the policy.
                    (B) 6-month limit.--A long-term care policy or 
                certificate issued under this subtitle may impose a 
                limitation or exclusion of benefits relating to 
                treatment of a condition based on the fact that the 
                condition preexisted the effective date of the policy 
                or certificate with respect to an individual if--
                            (i) a condition that was diagnosed or 
                        treated during the 6-month period ending on the 
                        day before the first date of coverage under the 
                        policy or certificate; and
                            (ii) the limitation or exclusion extends 
                        for a period not more than 6 months after the 
                        date of coverage under the policy or 
                        certificate.
            (2) Replacement policies.--If a long-term care insurance 
        policy replaces another long-term care insurance policy, the 
        issuer of the replacing policy shall waive any time periods 
        applicable to preexisting conditions, waiting periods, 
        elimination periods, and probationary periods in the new policy 
        for similar benefits to the extent such time was spent under 
        the original policy.
    (f) Eligibility for Benefits.--
            (1) Long-term care policies.--Each long-term care insurance 
        policy shall--
                    (A) describe the level of benefits available under 
                the policy; and
                    (B) specify in clear, understandable terms, the 
                level (or levels) of physical, cognitive, or mental 
                impairment required in order to receive benefits under 
                the policy.
            (2) Functional assessment.--In order to submit a claim 
        under any long-term care insurance policy, each claimant shall 
        have a professional functional assessment of his or her 
        functional or cognitive abilities. Such initial assessment 
        shall be conducted by an individual or entity, meeting the 
        qualifications established by the Secretary, in consultation 
        with the NAIC, to assure the professional competence and 
        credibility of such individual or entity and that such 
        individual meets any applicable State licensure and 
        certification requirements. The individual or entity conducting 
        such assessment may not control, or be controlled by, the 
        issuer of the policy.
            (3) Claims review.--Except as provided in paragraph (4), 
        each long-term care insurance policy shall be subject to final 
        claims review by the carrier pursuant to the terms of the long-
        term care insurance policy.
            (4) Appeals process.--
                    (A) In general.--Each long-term care insurance 
                policy shall provide for a timely and independent 
                appeals process, meeting standards established by the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, for 
                individuals who dispute the results of the claims 
                review conducted under paragraph (3) or the 
                policyholder's functional assessment conducted under 
                paragraph (2).
                    (B) Independent assessment.--An appeals process 
                under this paragraph shall include, at the request of 
                the claimant, an independent assessment of the 
                claimant's functional or cognitive abilities.
                    (C) Conduct.--An independent assessment under 
                subparagraph (B) shall be conducted by an individual or 
                entity meeting the qualifications established by the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, to assure the 
                professional competence and credibility of such 
                individual or entity and any applicable State licensure 
                and certification requirements and may not be 
                conducted--
                            (i) by an individual who has a direct or 
                        indirect significant or controlling interest 
                        in, or direct affiliation or relationship with, 
                        the issuer of the policy;
                            (ii) by an entity that provides services to 
                        the policyholder or certificate holder for 
                        which benefits are available under the long-
                        term care insurance policy; or
                            (iii) by an individual or entity in control 
                        of, or controlled by, the issuer of the policy.
            (5) Standard assessments.--Not later than 2 years after the 
        date of enactment of this subtitle, the advisory committee 
        established under section 2201(d) shall recommend uniform needs 
        assessment mechanisms for the determination of eligibility for 
        benefits under such assessments.
            (6) Control defined.--For purposes of paragraphs (2) and 
        (4), the term ``control'' means the direct or indirect 
        possession of the power to direct the management and policies 
        of a person. Control is presumed to exist, if any person 
        directly or indirectly, owns, controls, holds with the power to 
        vote, or holds proxies representing at least 10 percent of the 
        voting securities of another person.
    (g) Inflation Protection.--
            (1) Option to purchase.--A carrier may not offer a long-
        term care insurance policy unless the carrier also offers to 
        the proposed policyholder, including each group policyholder, 
        the option to purchase a long-term care insurance policy that 
        provides for increases in benefit levels, with benefit maximums 
        or reasonable durations that are meaningful, to account for 
        reasonably anticipated increases in the costs of long-term care 
        services covered by the policy. A carrier may not offer to a 
        policyholder an inflation protection feature that is less 
        favorable to the policyholder than one of the following:
                    (A) With respect to policies that provide for 
                automatic periodic increases in benefits, the policy 
                provides for an annual increase in benefits in a manner 
                so that such increases are computed annually at a rate 
                of not less than 5 percent.
                    (B) With respect to policies that provide for 
                periodic opportunities to elect an increase in 
                benefits, the policy guarantees that the insured 
                individual will have the right to periodically increase 
                the benefit levels under the policy without providing 
                evidence of insurability or health status so long as 
                the option for the previous period was not declined. 
                The amount of any such additional benefit may not be 
                less than the difference between--
                            (i) the existing policy benefit; and
                            (ii) such existing benefit compounded 
                        annually at a rate of at least 5 percent for 
                        the period beginning on the date on which the 
                        existing benefit is purchased and extending 
                        until the year in which the offer of increase 
                        is made.
                    (C) With respect to service benefit policies, the 
                policy covers a specified percentage of the actual or 
                reasonable charges and does not include a maximum 
                specified indemnity amount or limit.
            (2) Exception.--The requirements of paragraph (1) shall not 
        apply to life insurance policies or riders containing 
        accelerated long-term care benefits.
            (3) Required information.--Carriers shall include the 
        following information in or together with the outline of 
        coverage provided under this subtitle:
                    (A) A comparison (shown as a graph) of the benefit 
                levels of a policy that increases benefits over the 
                policy period with a policy that does not increase 
                benefits. Such comparison shall show benefit levels 
                over not less than a 20-year period.
                    (B) Any expected premium increases or additional 
                premiums required to pay for any automatic or optional 
                benefit increases, whether the individual who purchases 
                the policy obtains the inflation protection initially 
                or whether such individual delays purchasing such 
                protection until a future time.
            (4) Continuation of protection.--Benefit increases under a 
        policy described in paragraph (1) shall continue without regard 
        to an insured's age, claim status or claim history, or the 
        length of time the individual has been insured under the 
        policy.
            (5) Constant premium.--A policy described in paragraph (1) 
        that provides for automatic benefit increases shall include an 
        offer of a premium that the carrier expects to remain constant. 
        Such offer shall disclose in a conspicuous manner that the 
        premium may change in the future unless the premium is 
        guaranteed to remain constant.
            (6) Rejection.--Inflation protection under this subsection 
        shall be included in a long-term care insurance policy unless a 
        carrier obtains a written rejection of such protection signed 
        by the policyholder.

SEC. 2216. NONFORFEITURE.

    (a) In General.--Each long-term care insurance policy (or 
certificate) shall provide that if the policy lapses after the policy 
has been in effect for a minimum period (specified under the standards 
under section 2201(a)), the policy will provide, without payment of any 
additional premiums, nonforfeiture benefits as determined appropriate 
by the Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC.
    (b) Establishment of Standards.--The standards under section 
2201(a) shall provide that the percentage or amount of benefits under 
subsection (a) shall increase based upon the policyholder's equity in 
the policy.

SEC. 2217. LIMIT OF PERIOD OF CONTESTABILITY AND RIGHT TO RETURN.

    (a) Contestability.--A carrier may not cancel or renew a long-term 
care insurance policy or deny a claim under the policy based on fraud 
or intentional misrepresentation relating to the issuance of the policy 
unless notice of such fraud or misrepresentation is provided within a 
time period to be determined by the Secretary, in consultation with the 
NAIC.
    (b) Right to Return.--Each applicant for a long-term care insurance 
policy shall have the right to return the policy (or certificates) 
within 30 days of the date of its delivery (and to have the premium 
refunded) if, after examination of the policy or certificate, the 
applicant is not satisfied for any reason.

SEC. 2218. CIVIL MONEY PENALTY.

    (a) Carrier.--Any carrier, association or its subsidiary that sells 
or offers for sale a long-term care insurance policy and that--
            (1) fails to make a refund in accordance with section 
        2213(a);
            (2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with section 
        2213(b);
            (3) fails to provide, make available, or report information 
        in accordance with subsections (c) or (d) of section 2213;
            (4) provides a commission or compensation in violation of 
        section 2213(e);
            (5) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation of 
        section 2215(b)(1); or
            (6) issues a policy without obtaining certain information 
        in violation of section 2215(f);
is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $25,000 for each 
such violation.
    (b) Agents.--Any agent that sells or offers for sale a long-term 
care insurance policy and that--
            (1) fails to make a refund in accordance with section 
        2213(a);
            (2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with section 
        2213(b);
            (3) fails to provide, make available, or report information 
        in accordance with subsections (c) or (d) of section 2213;
            (4) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation of 
        section 2215(b)(1); or
            (5) issues a policy without obtaining certain information 
        in violation of section 2215(f);
is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $15,000 for each 
such violation.
    (c) Effect on State Law.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as preempting or otherwise limiting the penalties that may be 
imposed by a State for the types of conduct described in this section.

 PART 3--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICIES, DEFINITION AND ENDORSEMENTS

SEC. 2221. LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED.

    (a) In General.--As used in this section, the term ``long-term care 
insurance policy'' means any insurance policy, rider or certificate 
advertised, marketed, offered or designed to provide coverage for not 
less than 12 consecutive months for each covered individual on an 
expense incurred, indemnity prepaid or other basis, for one or more 
necessary diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic, rehabilitative, 
maintenance or personal care services, provided in a setting other than 
an acute care unit of a hospital. Such term includes--
            (1) group and individual annuities and life insurance 
        policies, riders or certificates that provide directly, or that 
        supplement long-term care insurance; and
            (2) a policy, rider or certificates that provides for 
        payment of benefits based on cognitive impairment or the loss 
        of functional capacity.
    (b) Issuance.--Long-term care insurance policies may be issued by--
            (1) carriers;
            (2) fraternal benefit societies;
            (3) nonprofit health, hospital, and medical service 
        corporations;
            (4) prepaid health plans;
            (5) health maintenance organizations; or
            (6) any similar organization to the extent they are 
        otherwise authorized to issue life or health insurance.
    (c) Policies Excluded.--The term ``long-term care insurance 
policy'' shall not include any insurance policy, rider or certificate 
that is offered primarily to provide basic Medicare supplement 
coverage, basic hospital expense coverage, basic medical-surgical 
expense coverage, hospital confinement indemnity coverage, major 
medical expense coverage, disability income or related asset-protection 
coverage, accident only coverage, specified disease or specified 
accident coverage, or limited benefit health coverage. With respect to 
life insurance, such term shall not include life insurance policies, 
riders or certificates--
            (1) that accelerate the death benefit specifically for one 
        or more of the qualifying events of terminal illness, medical 
        conditions requiring extraordinary medical intervention, or 
        permanent institutional confinement,
            (2) that provide the option of a lump-sum payment for those 
        benefits, or
            (3) with respect to which neither the benefits nor the 
        eligibility for the benefits is conditioned upon the receipt of 
        long-term care.
    (d) Applications.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
subtitle, this subtitle shall apply to any product advertised, marketed 
or offered as a long-term insurance policy, rider or certificate.

SEC. 2222. CODE OF CONDUCT WITH RESPECT TO ENDORSEMENTS.

    Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subtitle, 
the Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, shall issue guidelines 
that shall apply to organizations and associations (other than 
employers and labor organizations that do not accept compensation) that 
provide endorsements of long-term care insurance policies, or that 
permit such policies to be offered for sale through the organization or 
association. Such guidelines shall include at minimum the following:
            (1) In endorsing or selling long-term care insurance 
        policies, the primary responsibility of an organization or 
        association shall be to educate their members concerning such 
        policies and assist such members in making informed decisions. 
        Such organizations and associations may not function primarily 
        as sales agents for insurance companies.
            (2) Organizations and associations shall provide objective 
        information regarding long-term care insurance policies sold or 
        endorsed by such organizations and associations to ensure that 
        members of such organizations and associations have a balanced 
        and complete understanding of both the strengths and weaknesses 
        of the policies that are being endorsed or sold.
            (3) Organizations and associations selling or endorsing 
        long-term care insurance policies shall disclose in marketing 
        literature provided to their members concerning such policies 
        the manner in which such policies and the insurance company 
        issuing such policies were selected. If the organization or 
        association and the insurance company have interlocking 
        directorates, the organization or association shall disclose 
        such fact to their members.
            (4) Organizations and associations selling or endorsing 
        long-term care insurance policies shall disclose in marketing 
        literature provided to their members concerning such policies 
        the nature and amount of the compensation arrangements 
        (including all fees, commissions, administrative fees and other 
        forms of financial support that the organization or association 
        receives) from the endorsement or sale of the policy to its 
        members.
            (5) The Boards of Directors of organizations and 
        associations selling or endorsing long-term care insurance 
        policies, if such organizations and associations have a Board 
        of Directors, shall review and approve such insurance policies, 
        the compensation arrangements and the marketing materials used 
        to promote sales of such policies.

                         Subtitle D--Life Care

SEC. 2301. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Life Care Act''.

SEC. 2302. LIFE CARE: PUBLIC INSURANCE PROGRAM FOR NURSING HOME CARE.

    The Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end 
thereof the following new title:

  ``TITLE XXVII--LIFE CARE: PUBLIC INSURANCE PROGRAM FOR NURSING HOME 
                                  CARE

``SEC. 2701. ESTABLISHMENT OF VOLUNTARY LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE 
              PROGRAM.

    ``The Secretary shall establish a voluntary insurance program for 
individuals 35 years of age and over to cover the nursing home stays of 
such individuals. The Secretary shall establish a process for 
enrollment in the Life Care program.

``SEC. 2702. BENEFITS.

    ``(a) In General.--
            ``(1) Eligibility for coverage.--Subject to subsection (c), 
        an individual who meets the eligibility criteria prescribed in 
        section 2703 shall be eligible under the program established 
        under this title for coverage for necessary services described 
        in subsection (b) (in the amounts described in subsection (c)) 
        that are provided to the individual by a nursing facility while 
        the individual is an inpatient of the facility.
            ``(2) Nonforfeiture.--The Secretary shall establish 
        standards to ensure the nonforfeiture of benefits for which 
        premiums have been paid.
    ``(b) Types.--Coverage may be provided under this title for--
            ``(1) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of 
        a registered professional nurse;
            ``(2) physical, occupational, or speech therapy furnished 
        by a facility or by others under arrangements with a facility;
            ``(3) medical social work services;
            ``(4) drug, biological, supply, appliance, and equipment 
        for use in the facility, that is ordinarily furnished by the 
        facility for the care and treatment of an inpatient;
            ``(5) such other services necessary to the functioning of a 
        patient, including personal care and assistance with activities 
        of daily living, as are generally provided by a nursing home 
        facility; and
            ``(6) with respect to the initial 6 months of covered 
        residence in a nursing facility, such room and board costs as 
        are not covered by beneficiary copayment.
    ``(c) Coverage Amount.--
            ``(1) In general.--The amount of coverage provided with 
        respect to an eligible individual for the services described in 
        subsection (b) shall, based on an election made by the 
        individual, not exceed $30,000, $60,000, or $90,000 over the 
        lifetime of the eligible individual. Such amounts shall be 
        adjusted by the Secretary to reflect increases in the Consumer 
        Price Index.
            ``(2) Asset protection.--An eligible individual shall be 
        entitled to the asset protection provided under section 2708.
    ``(d) Payment.--Amounts provided under this title with respect to 
an eligible individual for the services described in subsection (b) 
shall be paid from the general fund of the Treasury of the United 
States.
    ``(e) Residential Care Facilities.--The Secretary shall consider 
the feasibility of making payments under this title for services 
delivered in residential care facilities. Not later than 2 years after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report its 
findings to the Congress with respect to the feasibility of making such 
payments.

``SEC. 2703. ELIGIBILITY.

    ``(a) In General.--An individual shall be eligible for benefits 
under this title if--
            ``(1) the individual--
                    ``(A) is a legal resident of the United States and 
                has elected coverage under subsection (c); and
                    ``(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency 
                through a screening process (conducted in accordance 
                with section 2707)--
                            ``(i)(I) to require hands-on or standby 
                        assistance, supervision, or cueing (as defined 
                        in regulations) to perform three or more 
                        activities of daily living; or
                            ``(II) to require hands-on or standby 
                        assistance, supervision, or cueing with at 
                        least such instrumental activity (or 
                        activities) of daily living related to 
                        cognitive or mental impairment as the Secretary 
                        specifies; or
                            ``(III) to display symptoms of one or more 
                        serious behavioral problems (that is on a list 
                        of such problems specified by the Secretary) 
                        which create a need for supervision to prevent 
                        harm to self or others; or
                            ``(IV) has achieved a score, on a standard 
                        mental status protocol (or protocols) 
                        appropriate for measuring the individual's 
                        particular condition specified by the 
                        Secretary, that indicates either severe 
                        cognitive impairment or severe mental 
                        impairment, or both; and
                            ``(ii) to require such assistance, 
                        supervision, or cueing over a period of at 
                        least 90 days; and
            ``(2)(A) the individual has filed an application for such 
        benefits, and is in need of, benefits covered under this title; 
        or
            ``(B) the legal guardian of the individual has filed an 
        application on behalf of an individual who is in need of 
        benefits covered under this title; or
            ``(C) the representative of an individual who is 
        cognitively impaired and who is in need of benefits covered 
        under this title has filed an application on behalf of the 
        individual.
    ``(b) Current Individuals.--An individual who is in a hospital or 
nursing home on the date of the enrollment of the individual in the 
program established under this title shall be ineligible for coverage 
under this section until the individual's first spell of illness 
beginning after such date.
    ``(c) Election of Coverage.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to this subsection, an 
        individual shall have the option to purchase coverage under 
        this title when the individual is 35 years of age, 45 years of 
        age, 55 years of age, or 65 years of age.
            ``(2) Initial year.--During the 1-year period beginning on 
        the date on which final regulations that implement this title 
        are issued, an individual who is 35 years of age or older shall 
        be eligible to purchase insurance under this title, except that 
        such an individual shall not be eligible to purchase such 
        insurance--
                    ``(A) while confined to a hospital or nursing home;
                    ``(B) within the 6-month period after the 
                individual's confinement in a nursing home; or
                    ``(C) within the 90-day period after the 
                individual's confinement in a hospital.
        Individuals described in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) 
        shall become eligible to receive benefits under this title on 
        the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date such 
        individuals purchase insurance under this title.
            ``(3) Extension beyond initial year.--If an individual is 
        confined to a nursing home or hospital during a period that 
        extends beyond the first year after the effective date of this 
        title, an individual shall be eligible to enroll in the program 
        established by this title during the 60-day period beginning 
        after the individual's spell of illness.
            ``(4) Subsequent years.--During years subsequent to the 1-
        year period referred to in paragraph (2), an individual shall 
        be eligible to purchase insurance under this title within 6 
        months of the 35th, 45th, 55th or 65th birthday of the 
        individual.
            ``(5) Activation of benefits.--To receive coverage under 
        the insurance program established by this title, an individual 
        shall have purchased such coverage not later than 1 month prior 
        to admission to a nursing facility, unless the reason for the 
        need of services is a result of an accident or stroke 
        subsequent to the date that such individual enrolled for 
        coverage under this title.
    ``(d) Public Education.--In the 12 months preceding the initial 
enrollment period, the Secretary shall, either directly or through 
grants and contracts, conduct a public service and education campaign 
designed to inform potentially eligible individuals as to the nature of 
the benefits and the limited enrollment period. In conducting such 
campaigns the Secretary shall make information available to individuals 
through the open enrollment process for obtaining health care benefits 
under this Act.

``SEC. 2704. PREMIUM RATES.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall determine one premium rate 
for individuals electing to purchase coverage under this title at age 
35 (or between the ages of 35 and 44 during the initial enrollment 
period), a separate rate for those individuals who elect coverage at 
age 45 (or between the ages of 45 and 54 during the initial enrollment 
period), a separate rate for those individuals who elect such coverage 
at age 55 (or between that ages of 55 and 64 during the initial 
enrollment period), and a separate rate for those individuals who elect 
such coverage at age 65 (or at age 65 and over during the initial 
enrollment period). During the initial enrollment period, the Secretary 
shall establish actuarily fair, age-rated premiums for persons age 65 
and over.
    ``(b) Revision.--The Secretary shall revise premium rates annually 
to increase such rates to reflect the amount of the increase in the 
cost of living adjustment with respect to benefits under title II of 
the Social Security Act.
    ``(c) Rates.--In developing premium rates under the program 
established under this title, the Secretary shall establish rates that 
are expected to cover 100 percent of the reimbursement amount provided 
under this title for nursing home stays for those individuals enrolled 
in the program.
    ``(d) Waiver.--An individual electing to purchase coverage under 
this title shall not be required to pay premiums during any period in 
which such individual is receiving benefits under this title.
    ``(e) Payment.--Premiums shall be paid under this section into the 
general fund of the Treasury of the United States.

``SEC. 2705. QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) In General.--To be considered as a covered nursing home 
service under this title, such service must have been provided by a 
qualified service provider.
    ``(b) Types.--A provider shall be considered a qualified service 
provider under this title if the provider is a nursing facility that is 
certified by the State and meets the requirements of this title and any 
other standards established by the Secretary by regulation for the safe 
and efficient provision of services covered under this title.

``SEC. 2706. REIMBURSEMENT.

    ``(a) Amount.--Monthly reimbursement for nursing facility services 
under this title shall equal 65 percent (or during the initial 6 months 
of coverage, 80 percent) of the amount the Secretary determines to be 
reasonable and appropriate to cover the cost of care provided under 
this title.
    ``(b) Prospective Payment.--To the extent feasible, the Secretary 
shall establish a prospective payment mechanism for payment for nursing 
home services under this title that takes into account the expected 
resource utilization of individual patients based on their degree of 
disability, the methodology recommended for reimbursement of skilled 
nursing facilities under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, and 
other factors determining service requirements.
    ``(c) Room and Board Payment.--An individual receiving benefits 
under this program shall be responsible for the payment of an amount 
for room and board that is equal to--
            ``(1) with respect to the initial 6 months of residence in 
        a nursing facility, 20 percent of the average per diem rate 
        paid by the Secretary to nursing facilities receiving 
        reimbursement under this title; and
            ``(2) with respect to subsequent periods of residence, 35 
        percent of the average per diem rate paid by the Secretary to 
        nursing facilities receiving reimbursement under this title. 
        Payments under subsection (a) and (c) shall be considered 
        payment in full for services received under this section.
    ``(d) Priority Payers.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
title, reimbursement for nursing facility services provided under this 
title to an individual shall, to the extent available, be made under 
the Medicare program, under Department of Veterans Affairs' programs, 
or under private insurance policies prior to reimbursement under this 
title.

``SEC. 2707. LONG-TERM CARE SCREENING AGENCY.

    ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall contract with entities to 
act as Long-Term Care Screening Agencies (hereafter referred to in this 
title as the `Screening Agency') for each designated area of a State. 
It shall be the responsibility of such agency to assess the eligibility 
of individuals residing in the geographic jurisdiction of the Agency, 
for services provided under this title according to the requirements of 
this title and regulations prescribed by the Secretary. In entering 
into such contracts, the Secretary shall give preference to State 
governmental entities and private nonprofit agencies.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--The Screening Agency shall determine the 
eligibility of an individual under this title based on the results of a 
preliminary telephone interview or written questionnaire (completed by 
the applicant, by the caregiver of the applicant, or by the legal 
guardian or representative of the applicant) that shall be validated 
through the use of a screening tool administered in person to each 
applicant determined eligible through initial telephone or written 
questionnaire interviews not later than 15 days from the date on which 
such individual initially applied for services under this title.
    ``(c) Questionnaires and Screening Tools.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
        telephone or written questionnaire and a screening tool to be 
        used by the Screening Agency to determine the eligibility of an 
        individual for services under this title consistent with 
        requirements of this title and the standards established by the 
        Secretary by regulation.
            ``(2) Questionnaires.--The questionnaire shall include 
        questions about the functional impairment and mental status of 
        an individual and other criteria that the Secretary shall 
        prescribe by regulation.
            ``(3) Screening tools.--The screening tool should measure 
        functional impairment caused by physical or cognitive 
        conditions as well as information concerning cognition 
        disability, behavioral problems (such as wandering or abusive 
        and aggressive behavior), and any other criteria that the 
        Secretary shall prescribe by regulation. The screening tool 
        shall be administered in person.
    ``(d) Notification.--Not later than 15 days after the date on which 
an individual initially applied for services under this title (by 
telephone or written questionnaire), the Screening Agency shall notify 
such individual that such individual is not eligible for benefits, or 
that such individuals must schedule an in-person screening to determine 
final eligibility for benefits under this title. The Screening Agency 
shall notify such individual of its final decision not later than 2 
working days after the in-person screening.
    ``(e) In-Person Screening.--An individual (or the legal guardian or 
representative of such individual) whose application for benefits under 
this title is denied on the basis of information provided through a 
telephone or written questionnaire, shall be notified of such 
individual's right to an in-person screening by a nurse or appropriate 
health care professionals.
    ``(f) Appeals.--The Secretary shall establish a mechanism for 
hearings and appeals in cases in which individuals contest the 
eligibility findings of the Screening Agency.
    ``(g) Payment.--
            ``(1) Payment for screening.--The Screening Agency may 
        require payment from individuals only in accordance with 
        standards established by the Secretary.
            ``(2) No payment for poorest.--The Screening Agency may not 
        require payment for individuals with incomes of less than 150 
        percent of the official poverty line.

``SEC. 2708. ASSET PROTECTION.

    ``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the assets an 
eligible individual may retain and be determined eligible for nursing 
facility benefits, including payments of room and board under this 
title, under State Medicaid programs (in accordance with section 
1902(a)(10)) shall be increased by the amount of coverage ($30,000, 
$60,000, or $90,000) elected under section 2702.

``SEC. 2709. RELATION TO PRIVATE INSURANCE.

    ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), an insurer 
may not offer a long-term care insurance policy to an individual who 
has purchased coverage under this title if the coverage under such 
policy duplicates the coverage provided under this title.
    ``(b) Development of Standard Packages.--The Secretary shall 
develop standard long-term care insurance benefits packages that 
insurers may offer to insured individuals under this title. Such 
packages shall provide coverage for benefits that compliment, but do 
not duplicate, those covered under this title.

``SEC. 2710. DEFINITIONS.

    ``As used in this title:
            ``(1) Nursing facility.--The term `nursing facility' 
        means--
                    ``(A) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in 
                section 1819(a) of the Social Security Act); or
                    ``(B) a facility that is a nursing facility (as 
                defined in section 1919(a) of such Act) which meets the 
                requirements of section 1819(b)(4)(C) of such Act 
                (relating to nursing care).
            ``(2) Spell of illness.--The term `spell of illness' means 
        a period of consecutive days beginning with the first day on 
        which an individual is furnished services as an inpatient in a 
        hospital or nursing facility and ending with the close of the 
        first 6 consecutive months thereafter during which the 
        individual is no longer an inpatient of a nursing facility, or 
        90 days after the individual is no longer an inpatient in a 
        hospital.

``SEC. 2711. REPORTS.

    ``(a) In General.--Prior to the promulgation of regulations 
implementing this title, the Secretary shall report to Congress on--
            ``(1) the actuarially-sound premium rates to be used in the 
        implementation of this Act, including whether the premiums will 
        cover 100 percent of the benefits paid out, and whether Federal 
        funds will be required to support the payment of benefits;
            ``(2) an assessment of the impact of such premium rates on 
        the affordability of coverage under this Act;
            ``(3) a projected enrollment of individuals by age 
        category; and
            ``(4) an estimate of current and projected enrollment of 
        individuals, by age category in coverage under private long-
        term care insurance.
    ``(b) Life Care Report.--Not later than 2 years after the 
promulgation of regulations implementing this title, the Secretary 
shall report to Congress on the following aspects of the Life Care Act:
            ``(1) The current and projected premium rates.
            ``(2) The current and projected enrollment of individuals, 
        by age category and an estimate of current and projected 
        enrollment of individuals by age category in private long-term 
        care insurance.
            ``(3) The projected use of benefits and the impact of use 
        on premium rates.
            ``(4) An assessment of the impact of projected premium 
        rates on the affordability of coverage under this Act.
    ``(c) Recommendations.--The Secretary shall make recommendations to 
Congress regarding necessary revisions to the Life Care Act as a result 
of the findings provided in the reports submitted under this 
section.''.

                      Subtitle E--Study and Report

SEC. 2401. STUDY OF ISSUES RELATED TO END OF LIFE CARE.

    (a) Study.--
            (1) In general.--Within 6 months after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into an 
        agreement with the Institute of Medicine of the National 
        Academy of Sciences (or with another nonprofit, nongovernmental 
        organization or consortium of institutions if the Institute 
        declines to perform the study) to investigate and report on 
        issues relating to appropriate care at the end of life, 
        including how to determine the appropriateness of curative or 
        life-prolonging or palliative services for gravely or 
        terminally ill or injured persons of all ages.
            (2) Specific issues.--The study described in paragraph (1) 
        shall specifically include an examination of the following 
        issues:
                    (A) The epidemiology of dying.
                    (B) The feasibility and utility of clinical 
                practice guidelines for appropriate care.
                    (C) Conditions that promote or impede appropriate 
                care (such as professional training and beliefs, 
                financing and organization of services, patient and 
                public knowledge and attitudes).
                    (D) Priorities for research on the issues described 
                in the preceding subparagraphs.
                    (E) Concerns of health care practitioners and 
                providers, medical educators, the general public, and 
                those responsible for public and private decisions 
                about the organization, financing, and quality of 
                health care in the United States.
    (b) Report.--The Institute of Medicine (or the organization 
conducting the study under this section) shall submit to the Secretary 
and the Congress a report on the study described in subsection (a) 
within 27 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of 
this section.

                TITLE III--HEALTH PROFESSIONS WORKFORCE

        Subtitle A--Workforce Priorities Under Federal Payments

SEC. 3000. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) The term ``academic year'' has the meaning given such 
        term in section 3011(b)(3)(A).
            (2) The term ``allocation period'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3015(d).
            (3) The term ``annual number of specialty positions'' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 3013(g)(1).
            (4) The term ``approved physician training program'' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 3011(b)(1).
            (5) The term ``consumer price index'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3033(e)(1).
            (6) The term ``designation period'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3013(g)(2).
            (7) The term ``funding agreement'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3011(b)(3)(B).
            (8) The term ``general health care inflation factor'' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 3033(e)(4).
            (9) The term ``medical school'' has the meaning given such 
        term in section 3001(e)(2).
            (10) The term ``medical specialty'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3011(b)(3)(C).
            (11) The term ``National Council'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3001(e)(3).
            (12) The term ``primary health care'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3013(g)(3).
            (13) The term ``qualified applicant'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3011(b)(2), in the case of subpart B; and 
        has the meaning given such term in section 3031(c), in the case 
        of subpart C.
            (14) The term ``specialty position'' has the meaning given 
        such term in section 3013(g)(4).
            (15) The term ``training participant'' has the meaning 
        given such term in section 3013(g)(5).

 PART 1--INSTITUTIONAL COSTS OF GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION; WORKFORCE 
                               PRIORITIES

       Subpart A--National Council Regarding Workforce Priorities

SEC. 3001. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION.

    (a) In General.--There is established within the Department of 
Health and Human Services a council to be known as the National Council 
on Graduate Medical Education.
    (b) Duties.--The Secretary shall carry out subpart B acting through 
the National Council.
    (c) Composition.--
            (1) In general.--The membership of the National Council 
        shall include between 12 and 16 individuals who are appointed 
        to the Council from among individuals who are not officers or 
        employees of the United States. Such individuals shall be 
        appointed by the Secretary, and shall include individuals from 
        each of the following categories in the following proportions:
                    (A) One-quarter composed of consumers of health 
                care services, at least one of whom resides in a rural 
                area.
                    (B) One-quarter composed of primary health care 
                physicians who are faculty members of medical schools 
                (including officials of medical schools and executives 
                of teaching hospitals) and primary health care 
                physicians who are practicing and are not faculty 
                members of medical schools, at least one of whom 
                resides in a rural area.
                    (C) One-quarter composed of non-primary health care 
                specialty physicians who are faculty members of medical 
                schools, non-primary health care specialty physicians 
                who are not faculty members of medical schools, 
                officials of medical schools, and executive officers of 
                teaching hospitals.
                    (D) One-quarter composed of officers and employees 
                of health plans, and officers or members of purchasing 
                cooperatives.
            (2) Ex officio members; other federal officers or 
        employees.--The membership of the National Council shall 
        include individuals designated by the Secretary to serve as 
        members of the Council from among Federal officers or employees 
        who are appointed by the President, or by the Secretary or 
        other Federal officers who are appointed by the President with 
        the advice and consent of the Senate.
    (d) Chair.--The Secretary shall, from among members of the National 
Council appointed under subsection (c)(1), designate an individual to 
serve as the Chair of the Council.
    (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) The term ``academic health center'' means an entity 
        defined in section 3051(c)(1).
            (2) The term ``medical school'' means a school of medicine 
        (as defined in section 799 of the Public Health Service Act) or 
        a school of osteopathic medicine (as defined in such section).
            (3) The term ``National Council'' means the council 
        established in subsection (a).
    (f) Conforming Amendment Repealing the Council on Graduate Medical 
Education (COGME).--Effective on the date of the first meeting of the 
National Council, section 30 of the Health Professions Education 
Extension Amendments of 1992 (Public Law 102-408) is repealed.

         Subpart B--Authorized Positions in Specialty Training

SEC. 3011. COOPERATION REGARDING APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS.

    (a) In General.--With respect to an approved physician training 
program in a medical specialty, a funding agreement with a qualified 
applicant for payments under section 3031 and section 3051 for a 
calendar year is that the qualified applicant will ensure that the 
number of individuals enrolled in the program in the subsequent 
academic year is in accordance with this subpart.
    (b) Definitions.--
            (1) Approved program.--For purposes of this subtitle:
                    (A) The term ``approved physician training 
                program'', with respect to the medical specialty 
                involved, means a residency or other postgraduate 
                program that trains physicians and meets the following 
                conditions:
                            (i) Participation in the program may be 
                        counted toward certification in the medical 
                        specialty as determined under the applicable 
                        standards of the American Board of Medical 
                        Specialties or the Council on Postdoctoral 
                        Training of the American Osteopathic 
                        Association.
                            (ii) The program is accredited by the 
                        Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical 
                        Education, or approved by the Council on 
                        Postdoctoral Training of the American 
                        Osteopathic Association.
                    (B) The term ``approved physician training 
                program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
                in subparagraph (A) that provides health services in an 
                ambulatory setting, without regard to whether the 
                program provides inpatient hospital services.
                    (C) The term ``approved physician training 
                program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
                in subparagraph (A), whether operated by academic 
                health centers, teaching hospitals, group practices, 
                ambulatory care providers, prepaid health plans, or 
                other entities.
                    (D) The term ``approved physician training 
                program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
                in subparagraph (A) that provides fellowship training 
                in family medicine, general internal medicine or 
                general pediatrics, and provides training for a faculty 
                position in family medicine, general medicine or 
                general pediatrics.
            (2) Qualified applicant; subpart definition.--For purposes 
        of this subpart, the term ``qualified applicant'', with respect 
        to an academic year, means an entity that trains individuals in 
        an approved physician program that receives payments under 
        subpart C for the calendar year in which the academic year 
        begins.
            (3) Other definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
                    (A)(i) Except as provided in clause (iii), the term 
                ``academic year'' means the 1-year period beginning on 
                July 1. The academic year beginning July 1, 1993, is 
                academic year 1993-1994.
                    (ii) With respect to the funding agreement 
                described in subsection (a), the term ``subsequent 
                academic year'' means the academic year beginning July 
                1 of the calendar year for which payments are to be 
                made under the agreement.
                    (iii) For purposes of determining the academic year 
                in which a training participant enters an approved 
                physician training program, the academic year is the 1-
                year period beginning on or after June 1.
                    (B) The term ``funding agreement'', with respect to 
                payments under section 3031 and 3051 to a qualified 
                applicant, means that the Secretary may make the 
                payments only if the qualified applicant signs the 
                agreement involved.
                    (C) The term ``medical specialty'' includes all 
                medical, surgical, and other physician specialties and 
                subspecialties.

SEC. 3012. ANNUAL AUTHORIZATION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF GRADUATE MEDICAL 
              EDUCATION POSITIONS.

    With respect to the numbers designated by the Council for 
individuals entering eligible programs for an academic year pursuant to 
section 3011, the Council shall ensure that the aggregate number of 
individuals first entering any such program for the year does not 
exceed the following number (expressed as a percentage), as applicable 
to the academic year involved:
            (1) For academic year 1998-1999, 134 percent of the number 
        of individuals who graduated from medical schools in the United 
        States in academic year 1997-1998.
            (2) For academic year 1999-2000, 126 percent of such 
        number.
            (3) For academic year 2000-2001, 118 percent of such 
        number.
            (4) For academic year 2001-2002 and each subsequent 
        academic year, 110 percent of such number, except as provided 
        in section 3014.

SEC. 3013. ANNUAL AUTHORIZATION OF NUMBER OF SPECIALTY POSITIONS; 
              REQUIREMENTS REGARDING PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.

    (a) Annual Authorization of Number of Positions.--In the case of 
each medical specialty, the National Council shall, pursuant to section 
3011, designate for academic year 1998-1999 and each subsequent 
academic year the number of individuals nationwide who are authorized 
to be enrolled in eligible programs in each medical specialty for the 
academic year involved.
    (b) Primary Health Care.--
            (1) Requirement across specialities.--In carrying out 
        subsection (a) for an academic year, the National Council shall 
        ensure that, of the class of training participants entering all 
        eligible programs for their first year of graduate medical 
        education for academic year 1998-1999 or any subsequent 
        academic year, the percentage of such class that completes 
        eligible programs in primary health care and does not 
        subsequently enter a non-primary health care training program, 
        is not less than the following, as applicable to the academic 
        year involved:
                    (A) For academic year 1998-1999, 39 percent.
                    (B) For academic year 1999-2000, 44 percent.
                    (C) For academic year 2000-2001, 49 percent.
                    (D) For academic year 2001-2002 and each subsequent 
                academic year, 55 percent, except as provided in 
                section 3014.
            (2) Rule of construction.--The requirement of paragraph (1) 
        regarding a percentage applies in the aggregate to training 
        participants entering eligible programs for the academic year 
        involved, and not individually to any eligible program.
    (c) Designations Regarding 3-Year Periods.--
            (1) Designation periods.--For each medical specialty, the 
        National Council shall make the annual designations under 
        subsection (a) for periods of 3 academic years.
            (2) Initial period.--The first designation period 
        established by the National Council after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act shall be the academic years 1998-1999 
        through 2000-2001.
    (d) Certain Considerations in Designating Annual Numbers.--
            (1) In general.--Factors considered by the National Council 
        in designating the annual number of specialty positions for an 
        academic year for a medical specialty shall include the extent 
        to which there is a need for additional practitioners in the 
        speciality, as indicated by the following:
                    (A) The characteristics of diseases, disorders, or 
                health conditions treated, including--
                            (i) the incidence and prevalence (in the 
                        general population and in various other 
                        populations) of the diseases, disorders, or 
                        other health conditions with which the 
                        specialty is concerned;
                            (ii) the intensity of care required for 
                        each of these diseases, disorders, or health 
                        conditions;
                            (iii) the relevant training received and 
                        experience attained by primary health care and 
                        specialist physicians in caring for each of 
                        these diseases, disorders, or health 
                        conditions; and
                            (iv) should sufficient data become 
                        available, the extent to which individuals with 
                        certain diseases, disorders, or health 
                        conditions have better health outcomes when 
                        treated by non-primary health care physicians 
                        than by primary health care physicians.
                    (B) The number of physicians who will be practicing 
                in the specialty in the academic year.
                    (C) The number of physicians who will be practicing 
                in the specialty at the end of the 5-year period 
                beginning on the first day of the academic year.
                    (D) Whether, after examining medical specialty 
                requirements, the National Council determines that 
                specialty is a medical shortage specialty (as defined 
                by the National Council).
            (2) Recommendations of private organizations.--In 
        designating the annual number of specialty positions for an 
        academic year for a medical specialty, the National Council 
        shall consider the recommendations of organizations 
        representing physicians in the specialty, organizations 
        representing academic medicine, and the recommendations of 
        organizations representing consumers of the services of such 
        physicians.
    (e) Voluntary Compliance.--
            (1) Establishment of the positions for first designation 
        period.--Not later than June 1, 1996, the National Council 
        shall establish the number of positions in each medical 
        specialty that will be allocated under subsection (a) for the 
        academic years 1998-1999, 1999-2000, and 2000-2001.
            (2) Voluntary compliance.--A medical specialty shall not be 
        subject to the mandatory allocation system described in section 
        3015 if--
                    (A) by June 1, 1997, each eligible approved 
                physician training program has submitted to the 
                National Council a proposal for first year positions in 
                approved physician training programs in that particular 
                medical specialty for the academic years 1998-99, 1999-
                2000, and 2000-2001 and the total proposed number of 
                all such positions for the specialty does not exceed 
                the number of positions established for such specialty 
                under paragraph (1) for each such academic year; and
                    (B) in subsequent academic years, the total 
                proposed number of first year positions in approved 
                physician training programs in that particular medical 
                specialty does not exceed the number of individuals 
                nationwide who are authorized to be enrolled in 
                approved medical training programs for such medical 
                specialty for such year pursuant to subsection (a).
            (3) Loss of compliance.--The National Council may, at any 
        time, determine that a specialty is not in compliance with the 
        number of positions established by the Council under paragraph 
        (1) or subsection (a) and initiate, with respect to that 
        specialty, the system of mandatory allocations described in 
        section 3015.
    (f) Study.--Not later than January 1, 2005, the Secretary shall 
arrange for the completion, by the Institute of Medicine or other 
similar entity, of an independent study concerning the effect of 
medical workforce regulation and planning in general and in particular 
geographic areas. The results of such study together with 
recommendations concerning the appropriateness of modifying or 
eliminating workforce regulations shall be compiled in a report and 
transmitted by the Secretary to the President and the Congress.
    (g) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) The term ``annual number of specialty positions'', with 
        respect to a medical specialty, means the number designated by 
        the National Council under subsection (a) for eligible programs 
        for the academic year involved.
            (2) The term ``designation period'' means a 3-year period 
        under subsection (c)(1) for which designations under subsection 
        (a) are made by the National Council.
            (3) The term ``primary health care'' means the following 
        medical specialties: Family medicine, general internal 
        medicine, general pediatrics, geriatric medicine, and 
        obstetrics and gynecology. Only those participants in programs 
        with a significant primary care training emphasis will be 
        considered to have completed an eligible program in primary 
        care for the purposes of subsection (b)(1). Determination of 
        the meaning of a ``significant primary care training emphasis'' 
        will be made by the National Council.
            (4) The term ``specialty position'' means a position as a 
        training participant.
            (5) The term ``training participant'' means an individual 
        who is enrolled in an approved physician training program.

SEC. 3014. NATIONAL COUNCIL RECOMMENDATION OF NUMBER OF GRADUATE 
              MEDICAL EDUCATION POSITIONS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Recommendations.--Beginning with academic year 2001-
        2002 and each subsequent academic year, the National Council 
        may after considering the factors described in paragraph (2) 
        annually recommend to the Secretary a change in--
                    (A) the aggregate number of all training 
                participants entering the first year of graduate 
                medical education training in approved physician 
                training programs nationwide determined under section 
                3012(4); and
                    (B) in accordance with subsection (b), the 
                distribution of positions among medical specialties 
                determined under section 3013(a) and 3013(b)(1)(D).
            (2) Factors for consideration.--In developing a 
        recommendation under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
        consider the impact on rural, inner city, and public hospitals 
        of reducing numbers of individuals authorized to enter approved 
        physician training programs and the appropriate supply of 
        physicians in the aggregate and in particular medical 
        specialties.
    (b) Limitations on Recommended Percent for Primary Care for 
Academic Year 2001-2002.--For the academic year 2001-2002, the number 
that the National Council may recommend under subsection (a)(1)(B) may 
not be more than 5 percentage points less or 5 percentage points more 
than the number described in section 3013(b)(1)(D).
    (c) Consideration and Implementation by the Secretary.--The 
Secretary shall in the Secretary's discretion implement the 
recommendations by the National Council under subsection (a) in 
accordance with sections 3012 and 3013(b)(1). The Secretary may not 
modify such recommendations.

SEC. 3015. ALLOCATIONS AMONG SPECIALITIES AND PROGRAMS.

    (a) In General.--Subject to the provisions of sections 3012 and 
3013, for each academic year, the National Council shall for each 
medical specialty make allocations among eligible programs of the 
annual number of specialty positions that the Council has designated 
for such year. The preceding sentence is subject to subsection (b)(3).
    (b) Allocations Regarding 3-Year Period.--
            (1) In general.--For each medical specialty, the National 
        Council shall make the annual allocations under subsection (a) 
        for periods of 3 academic years.
            (2) Advance notice to programs.--With respect to the first 
        academic year of an allocation period established by the 
        National Council, the National Council shall, not later than 
        July 1 of the preceding academic year, notify each eligible 
        program of the allocations made for the program for each of the 
        academic years of the period.
            (3) Initial period.--The first allocation period 
        established by the National Council after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act shall be the academic years 1998-1999 
        through 2000-2001.
    (c) Certain Considerations.--
            (1) Geographic areas.--In making allocations under 
        subsection (a) for eligible programs of the various geographic 
        areas, the National Council shall include among the factors 
        considered the--
                    (A) distribution of approved physician training 
                programs with respect to population and community need; 
                and
                    (B) historical distribution of approved physician 
                training programs among the geographic areas.
            (2) Quality of programs.--In making allocations under 
        subsection (a) for eligible programs, the National Council 
        shall consider the quality of such programs.
            (3) Underrepresentation of minority groups and women.--In 
        making an allocation under subsection (a) for an eligible 
        program, the National Council shall include among the factors 
        considered the following:
                    (A) The extent to which the population of training 
                participants in the program includes training 
                participants who are members of racial or ethnic 
                minority groups and women.
                    (B) With respect to a racial or ethnic group or 
                women represented among the training participants, the 
                extent to which the group is underrepresented in the 
                field of medicine generally and in the various medical 
                specialities.
            (4) Underserved rural and inner-city communities.--In 
        making allocations under subsection (a) for eligible programs, 
        the National Council shall consider the extent to which the 
        population of training participants in the program includes 
        training participants who have resided in rural or inner-city 
        communities for a substantial period, as defined by the Council 
        and the proportion of past participants in the program who are 
        practicing in rural or inner-city communities.
            (5) Recommendations of private organizations.--In making 
        allocations under subsection (a) for eligible programs, the 
        National Council shall consider the recommendations of 
        organizations representing physicians in the medical 
        specialties, the recommendations of organizations representing 
        academic medicine and the recommendations of organizations 
        representing consumers of the services of such physicians.
    (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
``allocation period'' means a 3-year period under subsection (b)(1) for 
which allocations under subsection (a) are made by the National 
Council.

             Subpart C--Costs of Graduate Medical Education

      CHAPTER 1--OPERATION OF APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS

SEC. 3031. FEDERAL FORMULA PAYMENTS TO QUALIFIED ENTITIES FOR THE COSTS 
              OF THE OPERATION OF APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS.

    (a) In General.--In the case of a qualified entity that in 
accordance with section 3032 submits to the Secretary an application 
for calendar year 1997 or any subsequent calendar year, the Secretary 
shall make payments for such year to the qualified entity for the 
purpose specified in subsection (b). The Secretary shall make the 
payments in an amount determined in accordance with section 3033 and 
3034, and may administer the payments as a contract, grant, or 
cooperative agreement.
    (b) Payments for Operation of Approved Physician Training 
Programs.--The purpose of payments under subsection (a) is to assist a 
qualified applicant with the costs of operation of an approved 
physician training program. A funding agreement for such payments is 
that the qualified applicant involved will expend the payments only for 
such purpose or for such other related purposes as the Secretary may 
authorize.
    (c) Qualified Applicant; Subpart Definition.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of this subpart, the term 
        ``qualified applicant'', with respect to the calendar year 
        involved, means an entity--
                    (A) that trains individuals in approved physician 
                training programs; and
                    (B) that submits to the Secretary an application 
                for such year in accordance with section 3032.
            (2) Entities included.--The term ``qualified applicant'' 
        may include an approved physician training program, teaching 
        hospital, medical school, group practice, an entity 
        representing two or more parties engaged in a formal 
        association, a community health center or another entity 
        operating an approved physician training program.
    (d) Treatment of Podiatric and Dental Residency Programs.--Except 
as provided in section 3034, for the purposes of this subpart, an 
approved physician training program includes training programs approved 
by the Commission on Dental Accreditation or the Council of Podiatric 
Medical Education of the American Podiatric Medical Association. This 
subsection shall not apply for purposes of subpart B.

SEC. 3032. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of section 3031(a), an 
        application for payments under such section for a calendar year 
        is in accordance with this section if--
                    (A) the eligible entity involved submits the 
                application not later than the date specified by the 
                Secretary;
                    (B) the application demonstrates that the condition 
                described in subsection (b) is met with respect to the 
                program;
                    (C) the application contains each funding agreement 
                described in this part and the application provides 
                such assurances of compliance with the agreements as 
                the Secretary may require; and
                    (D) the application is in such form, is made in 
                such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
                and information as the Secretary determines to be 
                necessary to carry out this part.
            (2) Certain entities.--If an applicant under paragraph (1) 
        is an entity representing two or more parties--
                    (A) the application shall contain a written 
                agreement, signed by all participants, in which all of 
                the participants agree as to the manner in which the 
                payments will be allocated; and
                    (B) the applicant shall agree to submit additional 
                documentation, if requested by the National Council, 
                that demonstrates that the funds are distributed in the 
                manner agreed upon by all participants.
    (b) Certain Conditions.--An eligible entity meets the condition 
described in this subsection for receiving payments under section 3031 
for a calendar year if--
            (1) the entity agrees to use such funds only to support an 
        approved physician training program;
            (2) with respect to--
                    (A) a specialty for which programs have received 
                allocations under section 3015, the entity agrees that 
                funds will be used only to support approved training 
                programs for which the number of specialists in 
                training is consistent with the allotment under section 
                3015; and
                    (B) a specialty for which a voluntary program has 
                received allocations under section 3013(e), the entity 
                agrees that funds will only be used to support approved 
                training programs for which the number of specialists 
                in training is consistent with the allocations under 
                section 3015(e); and
            (3) the entity notifies each residency training program 
        director of each approved physician training program operated 
        by the entity of the amount of payments received by the entity 
        under this section and sections 3051 and 3055 that is 
        attributable to the number of training participants in the 
        program.
    (c) Residency Training Program Director.--For purposes of this 
section, the term ``residency training program director'' means an 
individual specified in the application of the entity as the official 
with primary administrative responsibility for an approved physician 
training program.

SEC. 3033. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PAYMENTS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF 
              PAYMENTS.

    (a) Graduate Medical Education Account.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2) and except as 
        provided in section 3034, the following amounts shall be 
        available for a calendar year for making payments under 
        sections 3031 and 3055 from the Graduate Medical Education 
        Account established under section 9551(a)(2)(A) of the Internal 
        Revenue Code of 1986:
                    (A) In the case of calendar year 1997, 
                $3,200,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of calendar year 1998, 
                $3,550,000,000.
                    (C) In the case of calendar year 1999, 
                $5,800,000,000.
                    (D) In the case of each of calendar years 2000 and 
                2001, $5,800,000,000.
                    (E) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (C) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor for such year (as defined in 
                subsection (e)).
            (2) Transitional provision.--
                    (A) In general.--With respect to making payments 
                under sections 3031 and 3055 for calendar year 1997 or 
                1998, the Secretary shall first make payments under 
                section 3031 to eligible programs described in 
                subparagraph (B) in the amount determined for the 
                programs under subsection (b) for such year, and then, 
                from such amounts as remain available under paragraph 
                (1) for such year, shall make payments under section 
                3031 to other eligible programs and shall make payments 
                under section 3055.
                    (B) Participating state.--An eligible program 
                described in this subparagraph is such a program that 
                is operated in a State that is a participating State 
                under title I.
    (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible Entities.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in section 3034, 
        payment amounts with respect to any physician training program 
        under this section shall be equal to the product of the number 
        of full time equivalent training participants in the program, 
        and the per resident amount for the training program.
            (2) Per resident amount.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided under 
                subparagraph (B), the per resident amount for a 
                training program shall be equal to--
                            (i) with respect to--
                                    (I) the first calendar year during 
                                which the program receives payment 
                                under subsection (a), 90 percent;
                                    (II) the second calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 80 
                                percent;
                                    (III) the third calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 70 
                                percent;
                                    (IV) the fourth calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 60 
                                percent; and
                                    (V) the fifth and subsequent 
                                calendar year during which the program 
                                receives payment under subsection (a), 
                                50 percent;
                        of the approved FTE resident amount that would 
                        have been determined under section 
                        1886(h)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 
                        U.S.C. 1395ww(h)(2)(D)) for the hospital 
                        operating such approved physician training 
                        program for a cost reporting period beginning 
                        in such calendar year if the amendments made by 
                        section 4306 of the Health Security Act had not 
                        been made; and
                            (ii) with respect to--
                                    (I) the first calendar year during 
                                which the program receives payment 
                                under subsection (a), 10 percent;
                                    (II) the second calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 20 
                                percent;
                                    (III) the third calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 30 
                                percent;
                                    (IV) the fourth calendar year 
                                during which the program receives 
                                payment under subsection (a), 40 
                                percent; and
                                    (V) the fifth and subsequent 
                                calendar years during which the program 
                                receives payment under subsection (a), 
                                50 percent;
                        of the geographically adjusted national average 
                        per resident amount.
                    (B) Minimum per resident amount.--Notwithstanding 
                the provisions of subparagraph (A), the per resident 
                amount for a training program shall not be less than 75 
                percent of the geographically adjusted national average 
                per resident amount determined in accordance with 
                subparagraph (A)(ii).
                    (C) No historic payment basis.--For purposes of 
                subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary shall determine the 
                appropriate per resident amount applicable to an entity 
                that--
                            (i) has an approved physician training 
                        program that sponsored or is affiliated with 
                        more than one hospital that had a per resident 
                        amount determined under section 1886(h) of the 
                        Social Security Act which reflects the average 
                        per resident amounts under such section for 
                        such hospitals; or
                            (ii) is an institution that did not have a 
                        per resident amount determined under such 
                        section for cost reporting periods beginning 
                        before 1996 which reflects the national average 
                        per resident amount.
            (3) Adjustment factor.--Payments under this section shall 
        be subject to an adjustment factor, as determined by the 
        Secretary, so that total payments in any year will not exceed 
        the amounts specified in subsection (a) and as provided in 
        subsection (d).
            (4) Additional provisions regarding national average 
        cost.--
                    (A) Determination of national average cost.--The 
                Secretary shall in accordance with clause (ii) of 
                subsection (b)(2)(A) determine, for academic year 1992-
                1993, an amount equal to the geographically adjusted 
                national average per resident amount described in such 
                clause with respect to training a participant in an 
                approved physician training program. The national 
                average applicable under such clause for a calendar 
                year for such programs is, subject to subparagraph (B), 
                the amount determined under the preceding sentence 
                increased by the amount necessary to offset the effects 
                of inflation occurring since academic year 1992-1993, 
                as determined through use of the consumer price index.
                    (B) Geographic adjustment.--The national average 
                determined under subparagraph (A) and applicable to a 
                calendar year shall, in the case of the eligible entity 
                involved, be adjusted by a factor to reflect regional 
                differences in the applicable wage and wage-related 
                costs.
            (5) Funding level and allocation method.--Not later than 
        January 1, 1998, the Secretary shall complete a study to 
        determine the effect and appropriateness of the funding level 
        and allocation method described in subsection (a) and 
        paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection on the 
        operation of training programs and on national workforce goals 
        and shall compile the findings and recommendations derived from 
        such study in a report to be submitted to the President and the 
        Congress.
    (c) Determination of Full-Time-Equivalent Training Participants.--
            (1) Rules.--The Secretary shall establish rules consistent 
        with this subsection for the computation of the number of full-
        time-equivalent training participants in approved physician 
        training programs under subsection (b)(1).
            (2) Adjustment for part-year or part-time training 
        participants.--Such rules shall take into account individuals 
        who serve as training participants for only a portion of a 
        period in an approved physician training program or 
        simultaneously with more than one such program.
            (3) Weighting factors for certain training participants.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to paragraph (4), such 
                rules shall provide, in calculating the number of full-
                time-equivalent training participants in an approved 
                physician training program--
                            (i) for a training participant who is in 
                        the participant's initial training period, the 
                        weighting factor is 1.00,
                            (ii) except as provided in clause (iii), 
                        for a training participant who is not in the 
                        participant's initial training period, the 
                        weighting factor is 0.75, and
                            (iii) in an academic year in which the 
                        total number of training participant positions 
                        in all approved physician training programs 
                        does not exceed--
                                    (I) 134 percent of United States 
                                medical school graduates in academic 
                                year 1997-1998, the weighting factor 
                                for a training participant who is not 
                                in the training participant's initial 
                                training period is 0.70;
                                    (II) 126 percent of United States 
                                medical school graduates in academic 
                                year 1997-1998, the weighting factor 
                                for such a participant is 0.90;
                                    (III) 118 percent of United States 
                                medical school graduates in 1997-1998, 
                                the weighting factor for such a 
                                participant is 0.95 percent; and
                                    (IV) 110 percent of United States 
                                medical school graduates in academic 
                                year 1997-1998, the weighting factor 
                                for such a participant, the weighting 
                                factor is 1.0.
                    (B) Study.--Not later than January 1, 1998, the 
                Secretary shall complete a study to determine the 
                effect that applying weighting factors in calculating 
                the number of full-time-equivalent training 
                participants would have on supporting national 
                workforce goals.
            (4) International medical graduates required to pass fmgems 
        examination.--Such rules shall provide that, in the case of an 
        individual who is an international medical graduate, the 
        individual shall not be counted as a training participant 
        unless--
                    (A) the individual has passed the FMGEMS 
                examination or the U.S. Medical Licensing Examination, 
                or
                    (B) the individual has previously received 
                certification from, or has previously passed the 
                examination of, the Educational Commission for Foreign 
                Medical Graduates.
            (5) Counting time spent in outpatient settings.--Such rules 
        shall provide that only time spent in activities relating to 
        patient care shall be counted and that all the time so spent by 
        a training participant under an approved physician training 
        program shall be counted towards the determination of full-time 
        equivalency, without regard to the setting in which the 
        activities are performed.
    (d) Limitation.--Subject to subsection (a), if the amount available 
from the Graduate Medical Education Account established under section 
9551(a)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for a calendar year 
is insufficient for providing each eligible entity with the amount of 
payments determined under subsection (b) for the entity for such year, 
the Secretary shall make such pro rata reductions in the amounts so 
determined as may be necessary to ensure that the total of payments 
made under section 3031 for such year equals the amount specified under 
section 3033(a).
    (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) Consumer price index.--The term ``consumer price 
        index'' means the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers 
        (U.S. city average).
            (2) International medical graduate.--The term 
        ``international medical graduate'' means a training participant 
        who is a graduate of a school of medicine, school of 
        osteopathy, school of dentistry, or school of podiatry that is 
        not--
                    (A) a school of medicine accredited by the Liaison 
                Committee on Medical Education of the American Medical 
                Association and the Association of American Medical 
                Colleges (or approved by such Committee as meeting the 
                standards necessary for such accreditation),
                    (B) a school of osteopathic medicine accredited by 
                the American Osteopathic Association, or approved by 
                such Association as meeting the standards necessary for 
                such accreditation,
                    (C) a school of dentistry which is accredited by 
                the Commission on Dental Accreditation, or
                    (D) a school of podiatric medicine which is 
                accredited by the Council of Podiatric Medical 
                Education of the American Podiatric Medical 
                Association.
            (3) FMGEMS examination.--The term ``FMGEMS examination'' 
        means parts I and II of the Foreign Medical Graduate 
        Examination in the Medical Sciences or any successor 
        examination recognized by the Secretary for this purpose.
            (4) General health care inflation factor.--(A) The term 
        ``general health care inflation factor'', with respect to a 
        year, means the percentage increase in the consumer price index 
        for the year plus the following:
                    (i) For 1997, 1.0 percentage points.
                    (ii) For 1998, 0.5 percentage points.
                    (iii) For 1999 and for 2000, 0 percentage points.
            (B) Years after 2000.--
                    (i) Recommendation to congress.--In 1999, the 
                Secretary shall submit to Congress recommendations, 
                after consultation with the Federal Reserve Board, on 
                what the general health care inflation factor should be 
                for years beginning with 2001.
                    (ii) Failure of congress to act.--If the Congress 
                fails to enact a law specifying the general health care 
                inflation factor for a year after 2000, the Secretary, 
                in January of the year before the year involved, shall 
                compute such factor for the year involved. Such factor 
                shall be the product of the factors described in 
                subparagraph (C) for that fiscal year, minus 1.
                    (iii) Study by federal reserve board.--Not later 
                than January 1, 1999, the Federal Reserve Board shall 
                conduct a study, and report to the Secretary, 
                concerning what the general health care inflation 
                factor should be for years beginning with 2001. Such 
                study shall consider whether continued indexing with 
                respect to such factor is advisable and whether the 
                consumer price index should be used (in whole or in 
                part, modified or unmodified) with respect to premium 
                caps for future years. The recommendations of the 
                Federal Reserve Board under such study shall be 
                considered in the recommendations submitted under 
                clause (i).
            (C) Factors.--The factors described in this subparagraph 
        for a year are the following:
                    (i) CPI.--1 plus the percentage change in the CPI 
                for the year, determined based upon the percentage 
                change in the average of the CPI for the 12-month 
                period ending with August 31 of the previous fiscal 
                year over such average for the preceding 12-month 
                period.
                    (ii) Real gdp per capita.--1 plus the average 
                annual percentage change in the real, per capita gross 
                domestic product of the United States during the 3-year 
                period ending in the preceding calendar year, 
                determined by the Secretary based on data supplied by 
                the Department of Commerce.
            (5) Initial training period.--The term ``initial training 
        period'' means the period of time required for board 
        eligibility, except that--
                    (A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), in no 
                case shall the initial period of participation exceed 
                an aggregate period of formal training of more than 5 
                years for any individual, and
                    (B) a period, of not more than 2 years, during 
                which an individual is in a--
                            (i) residency or fellowship program in 
                        geriatric medicine, preventive medicine, or 
                        adolescent medicine, or
                            (ii) a fellowship program in family 
                        medicine, general internal medicine or general 
                        pediatrics, which provides training for a 
                        faculty position in family medicine, general 
                        internal medicine or general pediatrics,
                shall be treated as part of the initial training 
                participation period, but shall not be counted against 
                any limitation on the initial training period.
        The initial training period shall be determined, with respect 
        to a training participant, as of the time the training 
        participant enters any approved physician training program.
            (6) Period of time required for board eligibility.--
                    (A) General rule.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
                (C), the term ``period of time required for board 
                eligibility'' means, for a training participant, the 
                minimum number of years of formal training necessary to 
                satisfy the requirements for initial board eligibility 
                in the particular specialty for which the training 
                participant is training.
                    (B) Application of 1985-1986 directory.--Except as 
                provided in subparagraph (C), the period of time 
                required for board eligibility shall be such period 
                specified in the 1985-1986 Directory of Residency 
                Training Programs published by the Accreditation 
                Council on Graduate Medical Education or a more current 
                version of such Directory or the equivalent directory 
                regarding postdoctoral training for osteopathic 
                physician training programs.
                    (C) Changes in period of time required for board 
                eligibility.--If the Accreditation Council on Graduate 
                Medical Education, in its Directory of Residency 
                Training Programs or the equivalent directory regarding 
                postdoctoral training for osteopathic physician 
                training programs--
                            (i) increases the minimum number of years 
                        of formal training necessary to satisfy the 
                        requirements for a specialty, above the period 
                        specified in its 1985-1986 Directory, the 
                        Secretary may increase the period of time 
                        required for board eligibility for that 
                        specialty, but not to exceed the period of time 
                        required for board eligibility specified in 
                        that later Directory, or
                            (ii) decreases the minimum number of years 
                        of formal training necessary to satisfy the 
                        requirements for a specialty, below the period 
                        specified in its 1985-1986 Directory, the 
                        Secretary may decrease the period of time 
                        required for board eligibility for that 
                        specialty, but not below the period of time 
                        required for board eligibility specified in 
                        that later Directory.

SEC. 3034. PAYMENTS FOR DENTAL AND PODIATRIC POSITIONS.

    (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the 
provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to dental and 
podiatric medicine training programs.
    (b) Limitation.--Subject to the amount made available under section 
3033(a), the aggregate amount available for making payments to all 
approved physician training programs in dentistry and podiatric 
medicine may not exceed $200,000,000 in any calendar year.
    (c) Payment Methodology.--The Secretary shall determine the amount 
to be paid to approved dental and podiatric training programs on the 
basis of a methodology to be developed by the Secretary that is 
equivalent to the methodology described in section 3033(b)(5).

   CHAPTER 2--ACADEMIC HEALTH CENTERS AND OTHER ELIGIBLE INSTITUTIONS

SEC. 3051. FEDERAL FORMULA PAYMENTS TO ACADEMIC HEALTH CENTERS AND 
              OTHER ELIGIBLE INSTITUTIONS.

    (a) In General.--In the case of an eligible institution that in 
accordance with section 3052 submits to the Secretary a written request 
for calendar year 1997 or any subsequent calendar year, the Secretary 
shall make payments for such year to the eligible institution for the 
purpose specified in subsection (b). The Secretary shall make the 
payments in an amount determined in accordance with section 3053, and 
may administer the payments as a contract, grant, or cooperative 
agreement.
    (b) Payments for Costs Incurred by Eligible Institutions.--
            (1) Costs attributable to academic nature of 
        institutions.--With respect to an eligible institution that is 
        a qualified academic health center or a qualified teaching 
        hospital, the purpose of payments under subsection (a) is to 
        assist such institutions with costs that are not routinely 
        incurred by other entities in providing health services, but 
        are incurred by such institutions in providing health services 
        by virtue of the academic nature of such institutions. Such 
        costs include--
                    (A) with respect to productivity in the provision 
                of health services, costs resulting from the reduced 
                rate of productivity of faculty due to teaching 
                responsibilities;
                    (B) the uncompensated costs of clinical research; 
                and
                    (C) exceptional costs associated with the treatment 
                of health conditions with respect to which an eligible 
                institution has specialized expertise (including 
                treatment of rare diseases, treatment of unusually 
                severe conditions, and providing other specialized 
                health care).
            (2) High intensity nonteaching rural hospital.--With 
        respect to an eligible institution that is a high intensity 
        nonteaching rural hospital, the purpose of payments under 
        subsection (a) is to assist the institution with the costs of 
        treating a substantial number of severely ill patients.
    (c) Definitions.--
            (1) Academic health center.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
        the term ``academic health center'' means an entity that 
        operates a teaching hospital that sponsors or is affiliated 
        with an approved physician training program.
            (2) Eligible institution.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
        the term ``eligible institution'', with respect to a calendar 
        year, means a qualified academic health center, qualified 
        teaching hospital, or high intensity nonteaching rural hospital 
        that submits to the Secretary a written request in accordance 
        with section 3052.
            (3) High intensity nonteaching rural hospital.--For 
        purposes of this subtitle, the term ``high intensity 
        nonteaching rural hospital'' means a nonteaching hospital 
        located in a rural area as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of 
        the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(2)(D)) that the 
        Secretary determines has a case-mix index (defined as the 
        average weight of all cases in the hospital for all diagnosis-
        related groups as determined in accordance with section 
        1886(d)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(4)) of greater than 
        120 percent of the national average case-mix index for all 
        rural hospitals.
            (4) Qualified center or hospital.--For purposes of this 
        subtitle:
                    (A) The term ``qualified academic health center'' 
                means an academic health center that operates a 
                teaching hospital.
                    (B) The term ``qualified teaching hospital'' means 
                any teaching hospital other than a teaching hospital 
                that is operated by an academic health center.
            (5) Teaching hospital.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
        term ``teaching hospital'' means a hospital that sponsors or is 
        affiliated with an approved physician training program (as 
        defined in section 3011(b) or section 3031(d)).

SEC. 3052. REQUEST FOR PAYMENTS.

  (a) In General.--For purposes of section 3051, a written request for 
payments under such section is in accordance with this section if--
            (1) the eligible institution involved submits the request 
        not later than the date specified by the Secretary;
            (2) the request is accompanied by each funding agreement 
        described in this part; and
            (3) the request is in such form, is made in such manner, 
        and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as 
        the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this 
        part.
    (b) Continued Status as Eligible Institution.--A funding agreement 
for payments under section 3051 is that the eligible institution 
involved will maintain status as such an eligible institution. For 
purposes of this subtitle, the term ``funding agreement'', with respect 
to payments under section 3051 to such an eligible institution, means 
that the Secretary may make the payments only if the eligible 
institution makes the agreement involved.
    (c) Compliance With Specialty Allocations.--A funding agreement for 
payments under section 3051 is that an eligible institution that 
operates or is affiliated with an approved physician training program 
shall receive such payments only if the number of specialists in such a 
program is consistent with the allotment under section 3015 or 3013(e).

SEC. 3053. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PAYMENTS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF 
              PAYMENTS.

    (a) Annual Academic Health Center Account.--
            (1) Availability of funds from account.--Except as provided 
        in paragraph (2), the following amounts shall be available for 
        a calendar year for making payments under section 3051 from the 
        Academic Health Center Account established under section 
        9551(a)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is the 
        following, as applicable to the calendar year:
                    (A) In the case of calendar year 1997, 
                $6,280,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of calendar year 1997, 
                $7,250,000,000.
                    (C) In the case of calendar year 1997, 
                $8,220,000,000.
                    (D) In the case of calendar year 2000, 
                $9,400,000,000.
                    (E) In the case of calendar year 2001, 
                $10,640,000,000.
                    (F) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (E) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor (as defined in subsection (d)).
            (2) Special allotments.--Of the amounts available for a 
        calendar year for making payments under subsection (a) pursuant 
        to paragraph (1)--
                    (A) such amounts as are necessary shall be reserved 
                to make payments to eligible institutions that are high 
                intensity nonteaching rural hospitals; and
                    (B) the remainder of the amounts available for 
                making payments under subsection (a), shall be expended 
                for making payments under section 3051 to other 
                eligible institutions.
    (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible Institutions.--
            (1) Qualified academic health centers and qualified 
        teaching hospitals.--The amount of payments required in section 
        3051 to be made to a qualified academic health center or a 
        qualified teaching hospital for a calendar year is an amount 
        equal to the product of--
                    (A) the amount available for making such payments 
                for the calendar year from the Academic Health Center 
                Account established under section 9551(a)(2)(B) of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
                    (B) the percentage constituted by the ratio of--
                            (i) the product of--
                                    (I) the sum, for all discharges of 
                                individuals, of the amounts otherwise 
                                paid on behalf of such individuals; and
                                    (II) an adjustment factor equal to 
                                (e raised to the power (.405  x  r) -
                                1), where ``r'' is the ratio of the 
                                qualified academic health center's or 
                                the qualified teaching hospital's full-
                                time equivalent training participants 
                                to beds and ``e'' is the natural log of 
                                one; and
                            (ii) the sum of the respective amounts 
                        determined under clause (i) for qualified 
                        academic health centers and qualified teaching 
                        hospitals.
            (2) High intensity nonteaching rural hospital.--Subject to 
        the annual amount reserved for high intensity nonteaching rural 
        hospitals under subsection (a)(2)(A) for a calendar year, the 
        amount required under section 3051 to be made to a high 
        intensity nonteaching rural hospital is an amount equal to 5 
        percent of the inpatient costs of patient care for all patients 
        of the hospital.
            (3) Adjustment factor.--Payments under this section shall 
        be subject to an adjustment factor, as determined by the 
        Secretary, so that total payments in any year will not exceed 
        the amounts specified in 3053(a).
    (c) Report Regarding Modifications in Formula.--Not later than July 
1, 2000, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report containing 
any recommendations of the Secretary for the modification of the 
program of formula payments described in this chapter. In preparing 
such report the Secretary shall consider--
            (1) the costs described in section 3051(b) incurred by 
        academic health centers;
            (2) the adequacy of the formula payments established in 
        this chapter to cover such costs, taking into account any 
        additional revenues to cover such costs paid by other payers, 
        including private health plans;
            (3) the impact of the current payment methodology on 
        training in the ambulatory setting of national workforce goals, 
        and its effect on the education and training of primary care 
        physicians;
            (4) the importance to the maintenance of a quality national 
        health care system of academic health centers in providing for 
        the training of health professionals, in conducting clinical 
        research, and in providing innovative, technically advanced 
        care; and
            (5) the overall impact of the reformed health care system 
        on the ability of academic health centers to perform such 
        functions.
    (d) General Health Care Inflation Factor.--For purposes of this 
subtitle, the term ``general health care inflation factor'', with 
respect to a year, has the meaning given such term in section 
3033(e)(4) for such year.

                   Subpart D--Transitional Provisions

SEC. 3055. TRANSITIONAL PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONS.

    (a) Payments Regarding Effects of Subpart B Allocations.--For each 
of the calendar years specified in subsection (b)(2), in the case of an 
eligible entity that submits to the Secretary an application for such 
year in accordance with subsection (d), the Secretary shall make 
payments for the year to the entity for the purpose specified in 
subsection (c). The Secretary shall make the payments in an amount 
determined in accordance with subsection (e), and may administer the 
payments as a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement.
    (b) Eligible Entities Losing Specialty Positions; Relevant Years 
Regarding Payments.--
            (1) Eligible entities losing specialty positions.--The 
        Secretary may make payments under subsection (a) to an eligible 
        entity only if, with respect to the calendar year involved, the 
        entity meets the following conditions:
                    (A) During the year preceding the initiation of 
                transitional payments, the entity--
                            (i) received payments under section 1886(h) 
                        of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
                        1395ww(h)) for residents in one or more 
                        approved programs, or
                            (ii) sponsored or was affiliated with one 
                        or more approved physician training programs 
                        that received payments under section 3031.
                    (B) The aggregate number of full-time-equivalent 
                training participant positions in such programs have 
                been reduced below the aggregate number of full-time-
                equivalent training participant positions for the 
                academic year 1993-1994.
                    (C) The aggregate number of full-time-equivalent 
                training participant positions in such programs spend 
                in patient care activities at the hospital have been 
                reduced below the aggregate number of full-time-
                equivalent training participant positions for the 
                academic year 1993-1994, as a result of allocations 
                under subpart B, or as a result of voluntary changes 
                under section 3013(e) prior to January 1, 2002.
            (2) Relevant years.--Except as provided in subsection 
        (e)(3), the Secretary may make payments under subsection (a) to 
        an eligible entity only for the first four calendar years after 
        the initial calendar year for which the entity meets the 
        conditions described in paragraph (1).
            (3) Eligible entity.--For purposes of this section, the 
        term ``eligible entity'' means a qualified academic health 
        center or teaching hospital entity that submits to the 
        Secretary an application in accordance with subsection (d).
    (c) Purpose of Payments.--The purpose of payments under subsection 
(a) is to assist an eligible entity with the costs of operation. A 
funding agreement for such payments is that the entity involved will 
expend the payments only for such purpose.
    (d) Application for Payments.--For purposes of subsection (a), an 
application for payments under such subsection is in accordance with 
this subsection if--
            (1) the eligible entity involved submits the application 
        not later than the date specified by the Secretary;
            (2) the application demonstrates that the entity meets the 
        conditions described in subsection (b)(1) and that the entity 
        has cooperated with the approved physician training programs of 
        the entity in meeting the condition described in section 
        3032(b);
            (3) the application contains each funding agreement 
        described in this subpart and the application provides such 
        assurances of compliance with the agreements as the Secretary 
        may require; and
            (4) the application is in such form, is made in such 
        manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and 
        information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
        carry out this subpart.
    (e) Amount of Payments.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to the amounts available from the 
        Graduate Medical Education Account established under section 
        9551(a)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in the 
        calendar year involved, the amount of payments required in 
        subsection (a) to be made to an eligible entity for such year 
        is the product of the amount determined under paragraph (2) and 
        the applicable percentage specified in paragraph (3).
            (2) Number of specialty positions lost.--For purposes of 
        paragraph (1), the amount determined under this paragraph for 
        an eligible entity for the calendar year involved is the 
        product of--
                    (A) an amount equal to the aggregate number of 
                full-time equivalent specialty positions lost; and
                    (B) the amount that would be received under section 
                3033 for each speciality position lost.
            (3) Applicable percentage.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided under 
                subparagraph (B), for purposes of paragraph (1), the 
                applicable percentage for a calendar year is the 
                following, as applicable to such year:
                            (i) For the first calendar year after 
                        calendar year 1996 for which the eligible 
                        entity involved meets the conditions described 
                        in subsection (b)(1), 100 percent.
                            (ii) For the second such year, 75 percent.
                            (iii) For the third such year, 50 percent.
                            (iv) For the fourth such year, 25 percent.
                    (B) Exceptions.--
                            (i) Urban or rural underserved 
                        communities.--If the Secretary determines that 
                        access to health care in a rural or urban 
                        underserved community would be impaired by the 
                        annual reductions of the applicable percentage 
                        described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
                        may eliminate such annual reduction or adjust 
                        such percentage (at the discretion of the 
                        Secretary) to eligible institutions in such a 
                        community.
                            (ii) Voluntary compliance positions.--For 
                        the number of positions determined in paragraph 
                        (4)(A) that result from voluntary reductions in 
                        the number of specialty positions under section 
                        3013(e), the applicable percentage for a 
                        calendar year is the following as applicable to 
                        such year:
                                    (I) For the first 2 calendar years 
                                after calendar year 1997 for which the 
                                eligible entity involved meets the 
                                conditions described in subsection 
                                (b)(1), 100 percent.
                                    (II) For the third such year, 75 
                                percent.
                                    (III) For the fourth such year, 50 
                                percent.
                                    (IV) For the fifth such year, 25 
                                percent.
            (4) Determination of specialty positions lost.--
                    (A) For purposes of this paragraph, the aggregate 
                number of specialty positions lost, with respect to a 
                calendar year, is the difference between--
                            (i) the aggregate number of specialty 
                        positions described in subparagraph (B) that 
                        are estimated for the eligible entity involved 
                        for the academic year beginning in such 
                        calendar year; and
                            (ii) the aggregate number of such specialty 
                        positions at the entity for academic year 1993-
                        1994.
                    (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the specialty 
                positions described in this subparagraph are specialty 
                positions in the medical specialities with respect to 
                which payments under section 3031 are made to the 
                approved physician training programs of the eligible 
                entities involved.
                    (C) The total number of physicians lost for all 
                eligible entities may not exceed the number by which 
                the aggregate number of specialty positions with 
                respect to which payments are made under section 3031 
                for the academic year beginning in such calendar year 
                is below the number of full-time-equivalent positions 
                for the academic year 1993-1994.

SEC. 3056. WAIVER OF FOREIGN COUNTRY RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT WITH RESPECT 
              TO INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GRADUATES.

    (a) Waiver.--Section 212(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act 
(8 U.S.C. 1182(e)) is amended--
            (1) in the first proviso by inserting ``(or, in the case of 
        an alien described in clause (iii), pursuant to the request of 
        an interested State agency)'' after ``interested United States 
        Government agency''; and
            (2) by inserting after ``public interest'' the following: 
        ``except that in the case of a waiver requested by an 
        interested State agency the waiver shall be subject to the 
        requirements of section 214(k)''.
    (b) Restrictions on Waiver.--Section 214 of that Act (8 U.S.C. 
1184) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(k)(1) In the case of a request by an interested State agency for 
a waiver of the two-year foreign residence requirement under section 
212(e) with respect to an alien described in clause (iii) of that 
section, the Attorney General shall not grant such waiver unless--
            ``(A) in the case of an alien who is otherwise 
        contractually obligated to return to a foreign country the 
        Director of such country furnishes a statement in writing that 
        it has no objection to such waiver;
            ``(B) the alien demonstrates a bona fide offer of full-time 
        employment at a health facility and begins employment at such 
        facility within 90 days of arrival and agrees to continue to 
        work in accordance with paragraph (2) at the health care 
        facility in which the alien is employed for a total of not less 
        than 3 years (unless the Attorney General determines that 
        extenuating circumstances such as the closure of the facility 
        or hardship to the alien would justify a lesser period of 
        time);
            ``(C) the alien agrees to practice medicine in accordance 
        with paragraph (2) for a total of not less than 3 years only in 
        the geographic area or areas which are designated by the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services as having a shortage of 
        health care professionals; and
            ``(D) the grant of such waiver would not cause the number 
        of waivers allotted for that State for that fiscal year to 
        exceed twenty.
    ``(2) Whenever an interested State agency requests the waiver of 
the two-year residence requirement under section 212(e) with respect to 
an alien described in clause (iii) of that section, the Attorney 
General shall adjust the status of the alien to that of an alien 
described in section 101(a)(15)(H)(b).
    ``(3) If an alien whose status was adjusted under paragraph (2) 
demonstrates that the alien has worked for a period of 10 years in a 
health professional shortage area, then the Attorney General may 
approve a petition filed on the alien's behalf by the health care 
facility in which the alien is employed seeking adjustment of the 
alien's status to that of a special immigrant described in section 
101(a)(27)(L).
    ``(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the 
two-year foreign residence requirement under section 212(e) shall apply 
with respect to an alien described in clause (iii) of that section, who 
has not otherwise been accorded status under section 101(a)(27)(L), if 
at any time the alien practices medicine in an area other than an area 
described in paragraph (1)(C).''.
    (c) Special Immigrant Status.--Section 101(a)(27) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
                    ``(L) immigrants whose status have been adjusted 
                from that of an alien described in paragraph (15)(H)(b) 
                pursuant to section 214(k)(2), except that not more 
                than 500 immigrants may be admitted in any fiscal year 
                under this subparagraph.''.
    (d) Grounds for Deportation.--Section 241(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1251(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
                    ``(I) Failure to maintain employment as a health 
                care professional.--Any alien described in section 
                212(e)(iii) who fails to maintain employment in 
                accordance with subparagraphs (B) and (C) of section 
                212(k)(1).''.
    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to aliens admitted to the United States under section 
101(a)(15)(J) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, or acquiring such 
status after admission to the United States, before, on, or after the 
date of enactment of this Act and before June 1, 2005.

              PART 2--HEALTH PROFESSIONS SCHOOLS PAYMENTS

                 Subpart A--Payments to Medical Schools

SEC. 3061. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO MEDICAL SCHOOLS.

    (a) Entitlement.--Each eligible medical school that in accordance 
with section 3062 submits to the Secretary an application for academic 
year 1997, or any subsequent academic year, shall be entitled to 
payments for such year for the purpose specified in subsection (b). The 
Secretary shall make such payments in an amount determined in 
accordance with section 3063, and shall administer the payments as a 
grant. The preceding sentence constitutes budget authority in advance 
of appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the Federal 
Government to provide funding for such payments in the amounts, and for 
the years specified in this subpart.
    (b) Payments to Medical Schools.--The purpose specified in this 
subsection is to assist an eligible medical school with the direct 
costs of academic programs including the education of medical students 
(especially in primary health care and ambulatory training), graduate 
students in biomedical sciences, and otherwise unfunded faculty 
research. Payments under this section shall supplement and not supplant 
existing resources for this purpose. A funding agreement for such 
payments is that the medical school involved will expend the payments 
received pursuant to section 3063(b) as follows:
            (1) 50 percent shall be expended for primary health care 
        education (including prevention), and peer reviewed primary 
        care research in departments and divisions of primary care, 
        including family medicine departments, and divisions of general 
        internal medicine, geriatric medicine, and general pediatrics, 
        or in medical schools in which primary care activities are 
        primarily performed by other organizational units of the 
        medical school, such other units. The medical school will 
        distribute such amounts among the departments, divisions, or 
        other units of primary care so that the distribution of such 
        amounts bears a reasonable relationship to the amount of 
        ambulatory primary care education of medical students in such 
        departments and divisions and the national workforce goals and 
        shall specify such information and the distribution of funds in 
        the application under section 3062.
            (2) 25 percent shall be expended for other ambulatory 
        training.
            (3) 25 percent shall be expended for the support of peer-
        reviewed faculty research in biomedicine and health services.
    (c) Per Capita Payments by Medical Schools for Off-School 
Education.--A funding agreement for payments under subsection (a) for 
an eligible medical school for an academic year is that if, for the 
academic year, one or more students is enrolled (or accepted for 
enrollment) in the medical school on the contingency of successfully 
completing for the academic year a substantial number of hours in 
medical education through an educational institution that does not 
operate a medical school, and if the medical school provides credit 
toward a doctorate in medicine for the hours successfully completed at 
such other institution, then the medical school will pay to the other 
institution for such academic year an amount equal to the product of--
            (1) the product of--
                    (A) the number of such students attending the other 
                institution for such academic year; and
                    (B) the percentage of the academic year spent at 
                the other institution; and
            (2) the quotient of--
                    (A) the amount of payments made to the medical 
                school under subsection (a) for the academic year; over
                    (B) the number of students in the eligible medical 
                school in the academic year (including students 
                described in this subsection).
    (d) Eligible Medical School; Subpart Definition.--For purposes of 
this subpart, the term ``eligible medical school'' with respect to the 
academic year involved, means an approved medical school that submits 
to the Secretary an application for such year in accordance with 
section 3062.

SEC. 3062. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENTS.

    For purposes of section 3061(a), an application for payments under 
such section for an academic year is in accordance with this section 
if--
            (1) the dean (or appropriate presiding official) of the 
        eligible medical school submits the application not later than 
        the date specified by the Secretary;
            (2) the application contains each funding agreement 
        described in this subpart and provides such assurances of 
        compliance with the agreements as the Secretary may require; 
        and
            (3) the application is in such form, is made in such 
        manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and 
        information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
        carry out this part.

SEC. 3063. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS.

    (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--
            (1) In general.--The appropriation authorized for each each 
        of the following academic years for making payments pursuant to 
        section 3061(a) shall not be less than or in excess of the 
        following:
                    (A) In the case of academic year 1997, 
                $200,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of academic year 1998, 
                $300,000,000.
                    (C) In the case of academic year 1998, 
                $400,000,000.
                    (D) In the case of academic year 2000, 
                $500,000,000.
                    (E) In the case of academic year 2001, 
                $600,000,000.
                    (F) In the case of each subsequent academic year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (F) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor (as defined in subsection (d)).
    (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible Programs.--Subject 
to the annual amount available for making payments pursuant to 
subsection (a) for an academic year, the amount of the payment required 
under section 3041 to be made to an eligible medical school for the 
academic year is an amount equal to the sum of--
            (1) the product of \1/2\ of the amount available for the 
        academic year pursuant to subsection (a) and the proportion of 
        students (as determined by the Secretary) at the eligible 
        medical school in academic year 1993-1994 compared to all 
        students enrolled in eligible medical schools nationwide in 
        academic year 1993-1994;
            (2) the product of \1/4\ of the amount available for the 
        academic year pursuant to subsection (a) and the proportion of 
        peer-reviewed research conducted by the faculty at the eligible 
        medical school (including health services research) compared to 
        all such research conducted by the faculty at all eligible 
        medical schools nationwide; and
            (3) the product of \1/4\ of the amount available for the 
        academic year pursuant to subsection (a) and the proportion of 
        the eligible medical school's number of graduates in primary 
        care specialties from the class graduating 6 years prior to 
        such academic year who complete eligible programs in primary 
        health care and do not subsequently enter a nonprimary health 
        care training program compared to such number of graduates of 
        all eligible medical schools nationwide in such year.
The Secretary shall establish a method for measuring faculty research 
contributions.
    (c) Studies.--
            (1) Funding level and allocation method.--Not later than 
        January 1, 1998, the Secretary shall arrange for an independent 
        study and report to be completed, by the Institute of Medicine 
        or other similar entity, concerning the amount of and 
        allocation method for medical school funding, and the impact of 
        the payments under this part on national workforce goals, 
        including the education and training of primary care 
        physicians. Such report shall be submitted to the President and 
        the Congress and shall include findings and recommendations as 
        to the appropriateness of modifying funding levels or 
        allocations.
            (2) Impact of health care reform on medical education.--Not 
        later than January 1, 2000, the Secretary shall arrange for an 
        independent study and report to be completed, by the Institute 
        of Medicine or other similar entity, concerning the impact of 
        health reform on undergraduate medical education. Such report 
        shall be submitted to the President and the Congress and shall 
        include appropriate findings and recommendations.
    (d) General Health Care Inflation Factor.--As used in this 
subtitle, the term ``general health care inflation factor'' with 
respect to a year, has the meaning given such term in section 
3033(e)(4) for such year.

                Subpart B--Payments to Nursing Programs

SEC. 3071. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO GRADUATE NURSE TRAINING PROGRAMS.

    (a) Federal Payments to Graduate Nurse Training Programs.--
            (1) Entitlement.--Each eligible graduate nurse training 
        program that in accordance with paragraph (2) submits to the 
        Secretary an application for calendar year 1997 or any 
        subsequent calendar year shall be entitled to payments for such 
        year to the program for the purpose specified in paragraph (3). 
        The Secretary shall make such payments in an amount determined 
        in accordance with subsection (b), and shall administer the 
        payments as a grant. The preceding sentence constitutes budget 
        authority in advance of appropriations Acts and represents the 
        obligation of the Federal Government to provide funding for 
        such payments in the amounts, and for the years specified in 
        this subpart.
            (2) Application for payments.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), an application for payments for a calendar year is in 
        accordance with this paragraph if--
                    (A) the eligible graduate nurse training program 
                involved submits the application not later than the 
                date specified by the Secretary;
                    (B) the application provides such assurances as the 
                Secretary may require that the program will expend 
                payments only for the purpose described in paragraph 
                (3);
                    (C) the application contains each funding agreement 
                described in this subpart and the application provides 
                such assurances of compliance with the agreements as 
                the Secretary may require;
                    (D) the application contains an assurance that the 
                graduate nurse training program shall annually submit a 
                report on the costs of clinical training of nurses in 
                such manner as the Secretary may require; and
                    (E) the application is in such form, is made in 
                such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
                and information as the Secretary determines to be 
                necessary to carry out this part.
            (3) Payments for operation of graduate nurse training 
        programs.--The purpose of payments under paragraph (1) is to 
        assist an eligible graduate nurse training program with the 
        costs of the clinical portions of training programs and 
        supporting full-time enrollees in such training programs.
    (b) Authorization of Appropriations; Annual Amount of Payments.--
            (1) In general.--The appropriation authorized for each of 
        the following calendar years for making payments pursuant to 
        subsection (a)(1) shall not be less than or in excess of the 
        following:
                    (A) In the case of calendar year 1997, 
                $200,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (A) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor as defined in subsection (c).
            (2) Amount of payments for individual eligible programs.--
        Subject to the annual amount available under paragraph (1) for 
        a calendar year, the amount of payments required under 
        subsection (a) to be made to an eligible graduate nurse 
        training program that submits to the Secretary an application 
        for such year in accordance with subsection (a)(2) is an amount 
        equal to the product of--
                    (A) the number of full-time enrollees in the 
                program; and
                    (B) the estimated national average per full-time 
                enrollee cost of each graduate nurse training program 
                described in subsection (c)(1) for the calendar year 
                (as determined by the Secretary), adjusted by a factor 
                to reflect regional differences in the applicable wage 
                and wage related costs.
            (3) Limitation.--If the annual amount available under 
        paragraph (1) for a calendar year is insufficient for providing 
        each eligible graduate nurse training program that submits to 
        the Secretary an application for such year in accordance with 
        subsection (a)(2) with the amount of payments determined under 
        paragraph (2) for the program for such year, the Secretary 
        shall make such pro rata reductions in the amounts so 
        determined as may be necessary to ensure that the total of 
        payments made under subsection (a) for such year equals the 
        total of such amount.
    (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this part:
            (1) Eligible graduate nurse training program.--The term 
        ``eligible graduate nurse training program'' means programs in 
        advanced practice nurse education that are programs for 
        education as nurse practitioners, programs for education as 
        nurse midwives, programs for education as nurse anesthetists, 
        and programs for training clinical nurse specialists that are--
                    (A) designated by the Secretary as eligible 
                graduate nurse training programs;
                    (B) accredited programs that award a master degree 
                or a post-nurse master certificate and provide training 
                preparing an individual for practice as an advanced 
                practice nurse; and
                    (C) existing programs funded in 1994 under section 
                822 or 831 of the Public Health Service Act that do not 
                award a master degree may also be designated eligible 
                programs.
            (2) Programs for education as nurse practitioners.--The 
        term ``programs for education as nurse practitioners'' means 
        programs meeting the conditions to be programs for which awards 
        of grants and contracts may be made under section 822 of the 
        Public Health Service Act for education as a nurse 
        practitioners.
            (3) Programs for education as nurse midwives.--The term 
        ``programs for education as nurse midwives'' means programs 
        meeting the conditions to be programs for which awards of 
        grants and contracts may be made under section 822 of the 
        Public Health Service Act for education as nurse midwives.
            (4) Programs for training clinical nurse specialists.--The 
        term ``programs for training clinical nurse specialists'' means 
        programs in advanced practice nurse education meeting the 
        conditions to be programs for which awards of grants and 
        contracts may be made under section 821 of the Public Health 
        Service Act.
            (5) Full-time enrollee.--The term ``full-time enrollee'' 
        means an individual who is enrolled in an advanced nurse 
        training program and qualifies as a full-time student at the 
        institution operating such program.
            (6) General health care inflation factor.--The term 
        ``general health care inflation factor'', with respect to a 
        year, has the meaning given such term in section 3033(e)(4)for 
        such year.

SEC. 3072. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON GRADUATE NURSE TRAINING.

    (a) In General.--There is established within the Department of 
Health and Human Services a council to be known as the National Council 
on Graduate Nurse Training.
    (b) Duties.--The National Council on Graduate Nurse Training 
shall--
            (1) collect and analyze data on trends of supply and demand 
        for advanced practice nurses;
            (2) analyze and consider the supply of advanced practice 
        nurses in the context of changes in the overall supply of 
        health professionals;
            (3) recommend priorities for support of graduate nurse 
        training by type of programs described in section 3071(c);
            (4) report to Congress annually and include in its report 
        the number of students who graduated the previous year from 
        funded programs; and
            (5) consider and recommend appropriate standards for 
        assessing the quality of advanced practice nursing clinical 
        training programs.
    (c) Composition.--
            (1) In general.--The membership of the National Council on 
        Graduate Nurse Training shall include individuals who are 
        appointed to the Council from among individuals who are not 
        officers or employees of the United States. Such individuals 
        shall be appointed by the Secretary, and shall include--
                    (A) a nurse practitioner, a nurse-midwife, a nurse 
                anesthetist, and a clinical nurse specialist; and
                    (B) an official of a school of nursing, an official 
                of a teaching hospital or other health services entity, 
                and other experts in health care financing, delivery, 
                and professions training.
            (2) Ex officio members; other federal officers or 
        employees.--The membership of the National Council on Graduate 
        Nurse Training shall include individuals designated by the 
        Secretary, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and the Secretary 
        of the Department of Defense to serve as members of the Council 
        from among Federal officers or employees who are appointed by 
        the President, by the Secretary, the Secretary of Veterans 
        Affairs, the Secretary of Defense, or other Federal officers 
        who are appointed by the President with the advice and consent 
        of the Senate.
    (d) Chair.--The Secretary shall, from among members of the National 
Council on Graduate Nurse Training appointed under subsection (c)(1), 
designate an individual to serve as the Chair of the Council.

                 Subpart C--Payments to Dental Schools

SEC. 3073. DENTAL SCHOOLS.

    (a) Federal Payments to Dental Schools.--
            (1) Entitlement.--Each eligible school of dentistry that in 
        accordance with paragraph (2) submits to the Secretary an 
        application for calendar year 1997 or any subsequent calendar 
        year shall be entitled to payments for such year to the program 
        for the purpose specified in paragraph (3). The Secretary shall 
        make such payments in an amount determined in accordance with 
        subsection (b), and shall administer the payments as a grant. 
        The preceding sentence constitutes budget authority in advance 
        of appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the 
        Federal Government to provide funding for such payments in the 
        amounts, and for the years specified in this subpart.
            (2) Application for payments.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), an application for payments for a calendar year is in 
        accordance with this paragraph if--
                    (A) the dean (or appropriate presiding official of 
                the eligible school of dentistry involved) submits the 
                application not later than the date specified by the 
                Secretary;
                    (B) the application provides such assurances as the 
                Secretary may require that the program will expend 
                payments only for the purpose described in paragraph 
                (3);
                    (C) the application contains each funding agreement 
                described in this subpart and the application provides 
                such assurances of compliance with the agreements as 
                the Secretary may require; and
                    (D) the application is in such form, is made in 
                such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
                and information as the Secretary determines to be 
                necessary to carry out this subpart.
            (3) Purpose.--With respect to an eligible school of 
        dentistry, the purpose of payments under paragraph (1) is to 
        assist such school with the costs of training dentists, 
        including unreimbursed oral health care costs. A funding 
        agreement for such payments is that the school of dentistry 
        involved will expend the payments only for direct expenses 
        determined as allowable by the Secretary.
            (4) School of dentistry.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
        the term ``eligible school of dentistry'' means an accredited 
        public or nonprofit private school in a State that provides 
        training leading to a degree of doctor of dentistry or an 
        equivalent degree, and any advanced training relating to such 
        training.
    (b) Authorization of Appropriations; Annual Amount of Payments.--
            (1) In general.--The appropriation authorized for each of 
        the following calendar years for making payments pursuant to 
        subsection (a)(1) shall not be less than or in excess of the 
        following:
                    (A) In the case of each of calendar years 1997, 
                1998, 1999 and 2000, $50,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (A) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor as defined in subsection (c).
            (2) Amount of payments for individual eligible programs.--
        Subject to the annual amount available under paragraph (1) for 
        a calendar year, the amount of payments required under 
        subsection (a) to be made to an eligible school of dentistry 
        that submits to the Secretary an application for such year in 
        accordance with subsection (a)(2) is an amount equal to the sum 
        of--
                    (A) 75 percent of the amount available pursuant to 
                paragraph (1) multiplied by the ratio of the number of 
                full-time equivalent training participants in the 
                school of dentistry (determined in accordance with a 
                method to be developed by the Secretary) to the 
                national number of full-time equivalent training 
                participants in all schools of dentistry (as determined 
                by the Secretary) in the academic year 1993-1994; and
                    (B) 25 percent of the amount available pursuant to 
                paragraph (1) multiplied by the ratio of the 
                unreimbursed oral health care costs of the school of 
                dentistry to the national unreimbursed oral health care 
                costs of all schools of dentistry (as determined by the 
                Secretary).
    (c) Eligible School of Dentistry.--For purposes of this subpart, 
the term ``eligible school of dentistry'' with respect to a calendar 
year involved, means a school of dentistry that submits to the 
Secretary an application for such year in accordance with subsection 
(a)(2).

            Subpart D--Payments to Schools of Public Health

SEC. 3074. SCHOOLS OF PUBLIC HEALTH.

    (a) Federal Payments to Schools of Public Health.--
            (1) Entitlement.--Each eligible school of public health 
        that in accordance with paragraph (2) submits to the Secretary 
        an application for calendar year 1997 or any subsequent 
        calendar year shall be entitled to payments for such year to 
        the program for the purpose specified in paragraph (3). The 
        Secretary shall make such payments in an amount determined in 
        accordance with subsection (b), and shall administer the 
        payments as a grant. The preceding sentence constitutes budget 
        authority in advance of appropriations Acts and represents the 
        obligation of the Federal Government to provide funding for 
        such payments in the amounts, and for the years specified in 
        this subpart.
            (2) Application for payments.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), an application for payments for a calendar year is in 
        accordance with this paragraph if--
                    (A) the dean (or appropriate presiding official of 
                the eligible school of public health involved submits 
                the application not later than the date specified by 
                the Secretary;
                    (B) the application provides such assurances as the 
                Secretary may require that the program will expend 
                payments only for the purpose described in paragraph 
                (3);
                    (C) the application contains each funding agreement 
                described in this subpart and the application provides 
                such assurances of compliance with the agreements as 
                the Secretary may require; and
                    (D) the application is in such form, is made in 
                such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
                and information as the Secretary determines to be 
                necessary to carry out this subpart.
            (3) Purpose.--With respect to an eligible school of public 
        health, the purpose of payments under this paragraph is to 
        assist such school with the costs of training public health 
        professionals in disease prevention and health promotion, the 
        management of health services, health care policy and health 
        care organization, public health practice, outcomes and quality 
        of care, and epidemiologic and biostatistical research. A 
        funding agreement for such payments is that the school of 
        public health involved will expend the payments only for direct 
        expenses determined as allowable by the Secretary.
            (4) School of public health.--For purposes of this subpart, 
        the term ``school of public health'' means an accredited public 
        or non-profit private school in a State that--
                    (A) is located within a university accredited by 
                one of the recognized regional accrediting bodies;
                    (B) has as its central concept the prevention of 
                disease and the promotion of health through research, 
                education and professional practice;
                    (C) offers the Master of Public Health degree;
                    (D) provides, with sufficient faculty and other 
                resources, education at the master degree level with an 
                emphasis in at least each of the following areas:
                            (i) Behavioral sciences.
                            (ii) Biostatistics.
                            (iii) Environmental and health sciences.
                            (iv) Epidemiology.
                            (v) Health services administration; and
                    (E) offers graduate education at the doctoral 
                degree level in at least 1 of the 5 areas described in 
                subparagraph (D).
    (b) Authorization of Appropriations; Annual Amount of Payments.--
            (1) In general.--The appropriation authorized for each of 
        the following calendar years for making payments pursuant to 
        subsection (a)(1) shall not be less than or in excess of the 
        following:
                    (A) In the case of each of calendar years 1997, 
                1998, 1999 and 2000, $25,000,000.
                    (B) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, 
                the amount specified in subparagraph (A) increased by 
                the product of such amount and the general health care 
                inflation factor.
            (2) Payments to schools of public health.--
                    (A) In general.--The amount required under 
                subsection (a) to be made to an eligible school of 
                public health is an amount equal to the product of--
                            (i) the amount available for making such 
                        payments for the calendar year pursuant to 
                        paragraph (1); and
                            (ii) the percentage constituted by the 
                        ratio of the number of full-time students 
                        enrolled in degree programs in such schools and 
                        the number of full-time equivalents of part-
                        time students enrolled in degree programs in 
                        such school (determined in accordance with 
                        subparagraph (B)) to the national number of all 
                        such students in all schools of public health 
                        in the academic year beginning in the previous 
                        fiscal year.
                    (B) Full-time equivalence.--For the purposes of 
                this paragraph, the number of full-time equivalents of 
                part-time students for a school of public health for 
                any school year is a number equal to--
                            (i) the total number of credit hours of 
                        instructions in such year for which study 
                        leading to a graduate degree in public health 
                        or an equivalent degree, divided by
                            (ii) the number of credit hours of 
                        instructions which a student pursuing a full-
                        time course of study leading to a graduate 
                        degree in public health or equivalent degree.
                    (C) New school.--In the case of a new school of 
                public health which applies for a grant under this 
                section in the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in 
                which it will admit its first class, the enrollment for 
                purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be the number of 
                full-time students which the Secretary determines, on 
                the basis of assurances provided by the school, will be 
                enrolled in the school, in the fiscal year after the 
                fiscal year in which the grant is made.
    (c) Eligible School of Public Health.--The term ``eligible school 
of public health'' with respect to the calendar year involved, means a 
school of public health that submits to the Secretary for such year in 
accordance with subsection (a)(2).

                        PART 3--RELATED PROGRAMS

                    Subpart A--Workforce Development

SEC. 3081. PROGRAMS OF THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out the programs 
        described in this section, there is authorized to be 
        appropriated $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 
        1996, and $150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 
        through 2000 (in addition to amounts that may otherwise be 
        authorized to be appropriated for carrying out the programs).
            (2) Administration.--The programs described in this section 
        and carried out with amounts made available under subsection 
        (a) shall be carried out by the Secretary of Health and Human 
        Services.
    (b) Primary Care Physician and Physician Assistant Training.--For 
purposes of subsection (a), the programs described in this section 
include programs to support projects to train additional numbers of 
primary care physicians and physician assistants, including projects to 
enhance community-based generalist training for medical students, 
residents, and practicing physicians; to retrain mid-career physicians 
previously certified in a nonprimary care medical specialty; to expand 
the supply of physicians with special training to serve in rural and 
inner-city medically underserved areas; to support expansion of 
service-linked educational networks that train a range of primary care 
providers in community settings; to provide for training in managed 
care, cost-effective practice management, and continuous quality 
improvement; to provide interdisciplinary training for medical 
students, residents or practicing physicians, and dental students, 
residents, and dental hygienists, to deliver primary care to 
individuals with mental, physical, and developmental disabilities, 
including mental retardation, particularly those who are more than 18 
years of age; and to develop additional information on primary care 
workforce issues as required to meet future needs in health care.
    (c) Training of Underrepresented Racial and Ethnic Minorities and 
Disadvantaged Persons.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to support projects to 
increase the number of racial and ethnic underrepresented minority and 
disadvantaged persons in medicine, osteopathy, dentistry, advanced 
practice nursing, public health, psychology, and other health 
professions, including projects to provide continuing financial 
assistance for such persons entering health professions training 
programs; for financial assistance for facility renovation or 
construction; to increase support for recruitment and retention of such 
persons in the health professions; to maintain efforts to foster 
interest in health careers among such persons at the preprofessional 
level; and to increase the number of racial and ethnic minority health 
professions faculty at programs that have a significant number of 
underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities.
    (d) Expanding Rural Health Career Opportunities and Retention 
Efforts.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
        programs described in this section include programs to support 
        projects to increase the number of individuals living in rural, 
        underserved communities who enter the fields of medicine, 
        osteopathy, dentistry, advanced practice nursing, public 
        health, psychology, and other health professions, and to 
        encourage the retention of such health care professionals in 
        rural, underserved communities.
            (2) Rural health career training.--Projects to increase the 
        number of individuals recruited from rural, underserved areas 
        include projects--
                    (A) to provide continuing financial assistance for 
                such persons entering health professions education and 
                training programs;
                    (B) to increase efforts to foster interest in 
                health careers among such persons at the 
                preprofessional level;
                    (C) to foster the development of training curricula 
                appropriate to rural health care settings; and
                    (D) to increase support for recruitment of such 
                persons in the health professions.
            (3) Retention of rural health care providers.--Projects to 
        encourage the retention of individuals providing health care in 
        rural, underserved areas include projects--
                    (A) to establish State and regional locum tenans 
                programs in rural health care settings so that 
                substitute health care providers are available when 
                permanent staff is absent from the health care setting;
                    (B) to implement programs to foster 
                interdisciplinary team approaches to rural health 
                training and practice; and
                    (C) to develop state-of-the-art network 
                telecommunications and telemedicine systems to link 
                rural health professionals to other health care 
                providers and academic health care centers.
    (e) Nurse Training.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to support projects to 
support midlevel provider training and address priority nursing 
workforce needs, including projects to train additional nurse 
practitioners and nurse midwives; to support baccalaureate-level nurse 
training programs providing preparation for careers in teaching, 
community health service, and specialized clinical care; to train 
additional nurse clinicians and nurse anesthetists; to support 
interdisciplinary school-based community nursing programs; and to 
promote research on nursing workforce issues.
    (f) Inappropriate Practice Barriers; Full Utilization of Skills.--
For purposes of subsection (a), the programs described in this section 
include a program--
            (1) to develop and encourage the adoption of model 
        professional practice statutes for advanced practice nurses and 
        physician assistants, and to otherwise support efforts to 
        remove inappropriate barriers to practice by such nurses and 
        such physician assistants; and
            (2) to promote the full utilization of the professional 
        education and clinical skills of advanced practice nurses and 
        physician assistants.
    (g) Advisory Board on Health Care Workforce Development.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an Advisory 
        Board known as the National Advisory Board on Health Care 
        Workforce Development to advise, consult with, and make 
        recommendations to the Secretary and to the Secretary of Labor 
        on matters relating to--
                    (A) health care worker supply and its adequacy to 
                assure proper health care delivery system staffing in 
                both rural and urban areas; and
                    (B) the impact of this Act, and of related changes 
                in law regarding health care, on health care workers 
                and the needs of such workers, including needs 
                regarding education, training, and other career 
                development matters and the relationship of health care 
                workers to health care professionals.
            (2) Composition.--The Board established under paragraph (1) 
        shall be composed of the following members with expertise in 
        health care workforce issues appointed by the Secretary in 
        consultation with the Secretary of Labor:
                    (A) Five representatives of labor organizations 
                representing health care workers.
                    (B) Five representatives of health care delivery 
                institutions.
                    (C) Two representatives from health care education 
                organizations.
                    (D) Two representatives from consumer 
                organizations.
            (3) Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide the Board with 
        such administrative assistance as may be necessary for the 
        Board to carry out this subsection.
    (h) Other Programs.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to train health 
professionals and administrators in managed care, cost-effective 
practice management, continuous quality improvement practices, and 
provision of culturally sensitive care.
    (i) Relationship to Existing Programs.--This section may be carried 
out through programs established in title VII or VIII of the Public 
Health Service Act, as appropriate and as consistent with the purposes 
of such programs.
    (j) Mental Retardation and Other Developmental Disabilities.--Title 
VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after 
section 778, the following new section:

``SEC. 779. MENTAL RETARDATION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants and enter into 
contracts with university affiliated programs, schools of medicine, and 
schools of dentistry to assist in meeting the costs of such programs or 
schools to--
            ``(1) improve the interdisciplinary training of primary 
        care physicians and dentists in the health care services needs 
        of individuals with mental, physical, and developmental 
        disabilities, including mental retardation, particularly those 
        who are more than 18 years of age;
            ``(2) develop, evaluate, and disseminate curricula relating 
        to the health care service needs of individuals with mental, 
        physical, and developmental disabilities, including mental 
        retardation, particularly those individuals who are more than 
        18 years of age;
            ``(3) support the training and retraining of faculty to 
        provide such instruction; and
            ``(4) support continuing education of health professionals 
        who provide health care services and support to individuals 
        with mental, physical, and developmental disabilities, 
        including mental retardation, particularly those who are more 
        than 18 years of age.
    ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated, $10,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000.''.

SEC. 3082. PROGRAMS OF THE SECRETARY OF LABOR.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out the programs 
        described in this section, and for carrying out section 3083, 
        there is authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for fiscal 
        year 1995 and each subsequent fiscal year (in addition to 
        amounts that may otherwise be authorized to be appropriated for 
        carrying out the programs).
            (2) Administration.--The programs described in this section 
        and carried out with amounts made available under subsection 
        (a) shall be carried out by the Secretary of Labor (in this 
        section referred to as the ``Secretary'').
    (b) Retraining Programs; Advanced Career Positions; Workforce 
Adjustment Programs.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
        programs described in this section are the following:
                    (A) A program for skills upgrading and occupational 
                retraining (including retraining health care workers 
                for more advanced positions as technicians, nurses, and 
                physician assistants), and for quality and workforce 
                improvement.
                    (B) A demonstration program to assist workers in 
                health care institutions in obtaining advanced career 
                positions.
                    (C) A program to develop and operate health care 
                industry worker job banks in local employment services 
                agencies or one-stop career centers, subject to the 
                following:
                            (i) Such job banks shall be available to 
                        all health care providers in the community 
                        involved.
                            (ii) Such job banks shall begin operation 
                        not later than 90 days after the date of the 
                        enactment of this Act.
                            (iii)(I) With respect to each affected 
                        community, the local employment service agency 
                        or one-stop career center serving such 
                        community shall be allocated not less than one 
                        counselor whose responsibility it shall be to 
                        develop and operate health and insurance 
                        industry worker job banks. Where the impact of 
                        health care industry restructuring in the 
                        affected community is such that the functions 
                        required under this clause cannot be adequately 
                        provided by one counselor, additional 
                        counselors shall be allocated to carry out such 
                        functions.
                            (II) Such counselor shall solicit job 
                        openings from local health care industry 
                        employers, maintain frequent contacts with 
                        these and other employers, and monitor and 
                        update all job listings appropriate for 
                        displaced health care workers seeking 
                        employment.
                            (III) The local employment service agency 
                        or one-stop career center shall provide 
                        directly, or facilitate the provision of, labor 
                        exchange services to displaced health care 
                        industry workers, including assessment, 
                        counseling, testing, job-search assistance, job 
                        referral and placement, and referral to 
                        training and educational programs, where 
                        appropriate.
                            (IV) The Secretary of Labor shall develop 
                        performance goals for the effective performance 
                        of such job banks with respect to the number 
                        and quality of jobs listed, the degree of 
                        participation by employers in the affected 
                        community, and success in placement of job bank 
                        users in jobs listed, taking into account 
                        specific geographic, economic and labor market 
                        characteristics of the community served.
                    (D) A program to provide for joint labor-management 
                decision-making in the health care sector on workplace 
                matters related to the restructuring of the health care 
                delivery system provided for in this Act.
                    (E) A program to collect data regarding the 
                adequacy of the supply of health care workers by 
                occupation and sector of the health industry in light 
                of existing and projected demand for such workers.
                    (F)(i) A program to encourage the adoption and 
                utilization of high performance, high quality health 
                care delivery systems, including employee participation 
                committees and employee team systems that will 
                contribute to more effective health care by increasing 
                the role and the area of independent decisionmaking of 
                health care workers.
                    (ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
                ``employee participation committees'' means committees 
                of workers independently selected by and from a 
                facility's nonmanagerial workforce, or selected by 
                unions where collective bargaining agreements are in 
                effect, and which operate independently without 
                employer interference and consult with management on 
                issues of efficiency, productivity, and quality of 
                care, except that an employee participation committee 
                established under and operating in conformity with this 
                subparagraph shall not be considered a labor 
                organization within the meaning of section 2(5) of the 
                National Labor Relations Act or a representative within 
                the meaning of section 1, sixth, of the Railway Labor 
                Act.
            (2) Use of funds.--Amounts made available under subsection 
        (a) for carrying out this section may be expended for program 
        support, faculty development, trainee support, workforce 
        analysis, and dissemination of information, as necessary to 
        produce required performance outcomes.
    (c) Certain Requirements for Programs.--In carrying out the 
programs described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall, with respect 
to the organizations and employment positions involved, provide for the 
following:
            (1) Explicit, clearly defined skill requirements developed 
        for all the positions and projections of the number of openings 
        for each position.
            (2) Opportunities for internal career movement.
            (3) Opportunities to work while training or completing an 
        educational program.
            (4) Evaluation and dissemination.
            (5) Training opportunities in several forms, as 
        appropriate.
    (d) Administrative Requirements.--In carrying out the programs 
described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall, with respect to the 
organizations and employment positions involved, provide for the 
following:
            (1) Joint labor-management implementation and 
        administration.
            (2) Discussion with employees as to training needs for 
        career advancement.
            (3) Commitment to a policy of internal hirings and 
        promotion.
            (4) Provision of support services.
            (5) Consultations with employers and with organized labor.

SEC. 3083. REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS REGARDING REDEPLOYMENT OF 
              HEALTH CARE WORKERS.

    (a) State Programs for Home and Community-Based Services for 
Individuals with Disabilities.--With respect to the plan required in 
section 2102(a) (for State programs for home and community-based 
services for individuals with disabilities under part 1 of subtitle B 
of title II), the plan shall, in addition to requirements under such 
part, provide for the following:
            (1) Before initiating the process of implementing the State 
        program under such plan, negotiations will be commenced with 
        labor unions representing the employees of the affected 
        hospitals or other facilities.
            (2) Negotiations under paragraph (1) will address the 
        following:
                    (A) The impact of the implementation of the program 
                upon the workforce.
                    (B) Methods to redeploy workers to positions in the 
                proposed system, in the case of workers affected by the 
                program.
            (3) The plan will provide evidence that there has been 
        compliance with paragraphs (1) and (2), including a description 
        of the results of the negotiations.
    (b) Plan for Integration of Mental Health Systems.--With respect to 
the plan required in section 3511(a) (relating to the integration of 
the mental health and substance abuse services of a State and its 
political subdivisions with the mental health and substance abuse 
services included in the comprehensive benefit package under title I), 
the plan shall, in addition to requirements under such section, provide 
for the following:
            (1) Before initiating the process of implementing the 
        integration of such services, negotiations will be commenced 
        with labor unions representing the employees of the affected 
        hospitals or other facilities.
            (2) Negotiations under paragraph (1) will address the 
        following:
                    (A) The impact of the proposed changes upon the 
                workforce.
                    (B) Methods to redeploy workers to positions in the 
                proposed system, in the case of workers affected by the 
                proposed changes.
            (3) The plan will provide evidence that there has been 
        compliance with paragraphs (1) and (2), including a description 
        of the results of the negotiations.

       Subpart B--Transitional Provisions for Workforce Stability

SEC. 3091. APPLICATION.

    (a) Limitation to Transition Period.--The provisions of this 
subpart are intended to minimize, to the extent possible, disruptions 
in established employment relationships during the period of transition 
to a restructured health care delivery system, and shall terminate 
December 31, 2000.
    (b) Health Care Entities Covered by Subpart.--The provisions of 
this subpart, including references to displacing employers, hiring 
employers, successors and contractors, apply only to health care 
entities that employ more than 25 individuals.

SEC. 3092. DEFINITIONS.

    (a) Health Care Entity.--As used in this subpart, the term ``health 
care entity'' includes individuals, sole proprietorships, partnerships, 
associations, business trusts, corporations, governmental institutions, 
and public agencies (including state governments and political 
subdivisions thereof) that--
            (1) provide health care services under title I (including 
        nonmandatory health care services under title I) or under the 
        amendments made or programs referred to in titles IV and VIII; 
        or
            (2) provide necessary related services, including 
        administrative, food service, janitorial or maintenance 
        services, to an entity that provides health care services (as 
        described in subparagraph (1));
except that an entity that solely manufactures or provides goods or 
equipment to a health care entity shall not be considered a health care 
entity.
    (b) Affiliated Enterprise.--As used in this subpart, the term 
``affiliated enterprise'' means a health care entity that, together 
with the displacing employer, is considered a single employer as 
defined under 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
    (c) Preference Eligible Employee.--As used in this subpart, the 
term ``preference eligible employee'' means an employee who--
            (1) has been employed for in excess of 1 year by a health 
        care entity; and
            (2) has been displaced by or has received notice of an 
        impending displacement by such entity.
    (d) Displacement.--As used in this subpart, the term 
``displacement'' includes a lay off, termination, significant cutback 
in paid work hours, or other loss of employment, except that a 
discharge for just cause shall not constitute a displacement within the 
meaning of this paragraph.

SEC. 3093. OBLIGATIONS OF DISPLACING EMPLOYER AND AFFILIATED 
              ENTERPRISES IN EVENT OF DISPLACEMENT.

    (a) Notice.--A health care entity which displaces a preference 
eligible employee shall provide such employee with--
            (1) written notice, no later than the date of displacement, 
        of employment rights under this subpart, including employment 
        rights with respect to affiliated enterprises of the displacing 
        employer; and
            (2) notice of any existing or subsequent vacancies with the 
        displacing employer or an affiliated enterprise, which notice 
        may be given by posting of such vacancies wherever notices to 
        applicants for employment are customarily posted, by listing 
        such vacancies with the local employment services agency, or in 
        such other manner as the Secretary of Labor, by regulation, may 
        hereafter specify.
Any such vacancy shall remain open for applications by preference 
eligible employees for not less than 14 calendar days from the date on 
which the initial notice is provided.
    (b) Hiring Preference.--
            (1) In general.--A qualified preference eligible employee 
        who applies during the notice period described in subsection 
        (a)(2) for a vacant position with the displacing employer or an 
        affiliated enterprise, which position is in the employee's 
        occupational specialty and is located in the same State or 
        Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the employee 
        was employed prior to the displacement, shall be given the 
        right to accept or decline the position before the employer may 
        offer the position to a nonpreference eligible employee.
            (2) Multiple applications.--When considering applications 
        from more than one qualified preference eligible employee, the 
        hiring health care entity shall have discretion as to which of 
        such employees will be offered the position.
            (3) Employment qualifications.--Nothing in this subsection 
        shall be construed to prohibit the hiring health care entity 
        from establishing reasonable employment qualifications for a 
        vacancy to which this subpart applies, except that employees 
        who performed essentially the same work prior to their 
        displacement shall be deemed presumptively qualified for 
        comparable positions.
    (c) Termination of Preference Eligibility.--A displaced employee's 
preference eligibility shall terminate--
            (1) at such time as the displaced employee obtains 
        substantially equivalent employment with the displacing 
        employer; or
            (2) if the employee does not obtain such employment--
                    (A) with respect to health care entities other than 
                the displacing employer, 2 years after the date of the 
                displacement; or
                    (B) with respect to the displacing employer, upon 
                the termination of this subpart pursuant to section 
                3081(a).

SEC. 3094. EMPLOYMENT WITH SUCCESSORS.

    A health care entity that succeeds another health care entity 
through merger, consolidation, acquisition, contract, or other similar 
manner shall provide employees of the previous health care entity who 
would otherwise be displaced the right to continued employment in the 
job positions held by such employees prior thereto, unless the employer 
can establish that such positions no longer exist.

SEC. 3095. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING OBLIGATIONS DURING TRANSITION PERIOD.

    (a) Continuation of Previously Recognized Bargaining 
Representatives and Agreements.--If a majority of the employees in an 
appropriate bargaining unit consists of employees who were previously 
covered by a bargaining agreement or represented by an exclusive 
representative with respect to terms and conditions of employment, and 
there has not been a substantial change in the operations performed by 
the employees in that unit, the employer shall recognize such 
representative as the exclusive representative for the unit and shall 
assume the bargaining agreement, except that where application of this 
subsection would result in the recognition of more than one bargaining 
representative for a single unit, the question concerning which 
representative shall be recognized as the exclusive representative for 
the unit shall be resolved in accordance with applicable Federal or 
State law.
    (b) Joint Employer Status.--If employees of a contractor are 
assigned on a regular basis to perform work on the premises of a 
contracting entity and the tasks performed by these employees are 
functionally integrated with the operations of the contracting entity 
on whose premises such employees work, both the contractor and the 
contracting entity shall be considered joint employers of the employees 
with respect to work performed on those premises for purposes of 
determining compliance with labor relations laws. Employees of such 
joint employers may not be excluded from a bargaining unit within 
either entity on the basis of such joint employer status.

SEC. 3096. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

    (a) Regulations.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
implement the requirements of section 3093.
    (b) Other Laws.--The standards and requirements of this subpart 
shall not preempt or excuse noncompliance with any other applicable 
Federal or State law, regulation or municipal ordinance that 
establishes additional notice and preference standards or requirements 
concerning employee dislocation, employee representation, or collective 
bargaining.
    (c) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this subpart shall be 
construed--
            (1) to excuse or otherwise limit the obligation of an 
        employer to comply with any collective bargaining agreement or 
        any employment benefit plan that provides rights to employees 
        in addition to those provided under this subpart; or
            (2) to require an employer to recognize or bargain with a 
        labor organization in violation of State law.
    (d) Enforcement.--Unless otherwise specifically provided in this 
subpart, the enforcement provisions of section 107 of the Family and 
Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2617) shall apply with respect to 
the enforcement of the individual rights, including notice 
requirements, provided under section 3093. The collective bargaining 
and contractual rights provided under sections 3094 and 3095 shall be 
enforced through administrative and judicial procedures otherwise 
provided under Federal or State law with respect to such rights.

                  Subtitle B--Academic Health Centers

SEC. 3131. DISCRETIONARY GRANTS REGARDING ACCESS TO CENTERS.

    (a) Rural Information and Referral Systems.--The Secretary may make 
grants to eligible centers for the establishment and operation of 
information and referral systems to provide the services of such 
centers to rural health plans.
    (b) Other Purposes Regarding Urban and Rural Areas.--The Secretary 
may make grants to community- and provider-based health plans under 
section 1651(d) to carry out activities (other than activities carried 
out under subsection (a)) for the purpose of providing the services of 
eligible centers to residents of rural or urban communities who 
otherwise would not have adequate access to such services.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriate, $3,000,000 
for fiscal year 1995, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $5,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.

                Subtitle C--Health Research Initiatives

                 PART 1--PROGRAMS FOR CERTAIN AGENCIES

SEC. 3201. BIOMEDICAL, BEHAVIORAL AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH.

    (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
            (1) Nearly 4 of 5 peer reviewed research projects deemed 
        worthy of funding by the National Institutes of Health are not 
        funded, and 9 of 10 peer reviewed research projects deemed 
        worthy of funding by the Agency for Health Care Policy and 
        Research are not funded.
            (2) Less than 2 percent of the nearly one trillion dollars 
        our Nation spends on health care is devoted to health research, 
        while the defense industry spends 15 percent of its budget on 
        research.
            (3) Public opinion surveys have shown that Americans want 
        more Federal resources put into health research and support by 
        having a portion of their health insurance premiums set aside 
        for this purpose.
            (4) Ample evidence exists to demonstrate that health 
        research has improved the quality of health care in the United 
        States. Advances such as the development of vaccines, the cure 
        of many childhood cancers, drugs that effectively treat a host 
        of diseases and disorders, a process to protect our Nation's 
        blood supply from the HIV virus, progress against 
        cardiovasculor disease including heart attack and stroke, and 
        new strategies for the early detection and treatment of 
        diseases such as colon, breast, and prostate cancer clearly 
        demonstrates the benefits of health research.
            (5) Among the most effective methods to control health care 
        costs are the prevention of intentional and unintentional 
        injury and the prevention and cure of disease and disability, 
        thus, health research which holds the promise of prevention of 
        intentional and unintentional injury and cure and prevention of 
        disease and disability is a critical component of any 
        comprehensive health care reform plan.
            (6) The state of our Nation's research facilities at the 
        National Institutes of Health and at universities is 
        deteriorating significantly. Renovation and repair of these 
        facilities are badly needed to maintain and improve the quality 
        of research.
            (7) Because the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 
        freezes discretionary spending for the next 5 years, the 
        Nation's investment in health research through the National 
        Institutes of Health and the Agency for Health Care Policy and 
        Research is likely to decline in real terms unless corrective 
        legislative action is taken.
            (8) A health research fund is needed to maintain our 
        Nation's commitment to health research and to increase the 
        percentage of approved projects which receive funding at the 
        National Institutes of Health and the Agency for Health Care 
        Policy and Research to at least 33 percent.
            (9) Private sector investment in research and development 
        has been responsible for the vast majority of new developments 
        in pharmaceuticals, medical devices, biotechnology and other 
        health care innovations. Over 90 percent of the most prescribed 
        drugs in the United States were discovered by the research-
        based pharmaceutical industry.
            (10) United States industry is the preeminent world leader 
        in the research, development and delivery of innovative 
        therapies that improve the quality of care for people 
        throughout the world.
            (11) Global health care budgets may constrict private 
        sector investment in research and development. Further, they 
        may be inconsistent with the goal of developing promising new 
        cost effective treatment therapies.
    (b) Availability of Funds.--
            (1) In general.--With respect to each calendar year, the 
        Secretary shall pay, from funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
        appropriated, for activities under this section, an amount 
        equal to 0.25 percent in 1996 and subsequent years, of all 
        private premiums required to be paid in accordance with the 
        Act.
            (2) Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term 
        ``private health premiums'' means all premium related payments 
        made by employers, individuals, and families for coverage under 
        this Act.
            (3) Maintenance of effort.--No amounts made available under 
        this subsection shall replace or reduce the amount of 
        appropriations for the National Institutes of Health or the 
        Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
    (c) Purposes for Expenditures.--Part A of title IV of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 281 et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end thereof the following new section:

``SEC. 404F. EXPENDITURES FOR BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH.

    ``(a) In General.--With respect to 80 percent of the amounts made 
available under section 3201 of the Health Security Act in a fiscal 
year, the Secretary shall distribute--
            ``(1) 2 percent of such amounts during any fiscal year to 
        the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health 
        to be allocated at the Director's discretion for the following 
        activities:
                    ``(A) for carrying out the responsibilities of the 
                Office of the Director, in including the Office of 
                Research on Women's Health and the Office of Research 
                on Minority Health, the Office of Alternative Medicine 
                and the Office of Rare Diseases Research; and
                    ``(B) for construction and acquisition of equipment 
                for or facilities of or used by the National Institutes 
                of Health;
            ``(2) 2 percent of such amounts for transfer to the 
        National Center for Research Resources to carry out section 
        1502 of the National Institutes of Health Revitalization Act of 
        1993 concerning Biomedical and Behavioral Research Facilities;
            ``(3) 1 percent of such amounts during any fiscal year for 
        carrying out section 301 and part D of title IV with respect to 
        health information communications; and
            ``(4) the remainder of such amounts during any fiscal year 
        to member institutes of the National Institutes of Health and 
        Centers in the same proportion to the total amount received 
        under this section, as the amount of annual appropriations 
        under appropriations Acts for each member institute and Centers 
        for the fiscal year bears to the total amount of appropriations 
        under appropriations Acts for all member institutes and Centers 
        of the National Institutes of Health for the fiscal year.
    ``(b) Plans of Allocation.--The amounts transferred under 
subsection (a) shall be allocated by the Director of NIH or the various 
directors of the institutes and centers, as the case may be, pursuant 
to allocation plans developed by the various advisory councils to such 
directors, after consultation with such directors.''.

SEC. 3202. HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall distribute the remainder of 
the amounts made available under section 3201 in a fiscal year (not to 
exceed 20 percent of the total of amounts available in a fiscal year 
under such section), to the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research 
for policy-initiated and investigator-initiated research.
    (b) Research on Health Care Reform.--Section 902 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a), as amended by section 2(b) of 
Public Law 102-410 (106 Stat. 2094), is amended by adding at the end 
the following subsection:
    ``(f) Research on Health Care Reform.--
            ``(1) In general.--In carrying out section 901(b), the 
        Administrator shall conduct and support research on the reform 
        of the health care system of the United States, as directed by 
        the Secretary.
            ``(2) Priorities.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
        Administrator shall give priority to the following:
                    ``(A) Conducting and supporting research on the 
                appropriateness and effectiveness of alternative 
                clinical strategies (including community-based programs 
                and preventive services), the quality and outcomes of 
                care, and administrative simplification.
                    ``(B) Conducting and supporting research on the 
                appropriateness and effectiveness of alternative 
                community-based and clinical strategies including 
                integrating preventive services into primary care, the 
                effectiveness of preventive counseling and health 
                education, and the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of 
                clinical preventive services.
                    ``(C) Conducting and supporting research on 
                consumer choice and information resources; on the role 
                of shared decision making in enhancing patient and 
                provider therapeutic options; the effects of health 
                care reform on health delivery systems; methods for 
                risk adjustment; factors influencing access to health 
                care for vulnerable populations, including children, 
                persons with low-income, persons with disabilities, or 
                individuals with chronic or complex health conditions, 
                and primary care.
                    ``(D) The development of clinical practice 
                guidelines consistent with section 913, the 
                dissemination of such guidelines consistent with 
                section 903, and the assessment of the effectiveness of 
                such guidelines.''.

SEC. 3203. AHCPR GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS.

    (a) Traineeship Program.--Section 902(c) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a(c)) is amended--
            (1) by redesignating the matter following the subsection 
        heading as paragraph (1) and realigning the margin of such so 
        as to align with the margin of section 903(a)(1);
            (2) by inserting before ``The Administrator'' the 
        following: ``In general.--''; and
            (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(2) Traineeship program.--The Administrator shall 
        establish a traineeship program for not to exceed 25 
        investigators, to enable such investigators to carry out 
        research at the Agency that would benefit the mission of the 
        Agency and further the educational needs of such investigators. 
        Such investigator positions shall not be counted against any 
        Federal employment ceilings affecting the Agency.''.
    (b) Printing Services.--Section 902 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 299a) is 
amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
    ``(f) Authority to Contract for Printing Services.--The 
Administrator may publish or arrange for the publication of research 
findings and practice guidelines, without regard to section 501 of 
title 44, United States Code.''.
    (c) Panels.--Section 913(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 299b-2(a)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following 
new flush sentence:
``Panels convened for the purpose of carrying out paragraphs (1) and 
(2) shall not be considered advisory committees within the meaning of 
section 3(2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App. 
3(2)), and prior to publication by the Administrator, clinical practice 
guidelines, performance measures, and review criteria as described in 
section 912(a) are not subject to the requirements of section 552 of 
title 5, United States Code.''.
    (d) Arrangements.--Section 913 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 299b-2) is 
amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
    ``(d) Arrangements.--
            ``(1) In general.--Upon the request of a public or private 
        entity, the Administrator may collect, tabulate, and analyze 
        statistics, perform technology assessments, carry out health 
        services and outcomes and effectiveness research, and 
        facilitate the development of clinical practice guidelines 
        under arrangements with such entities under which such entities 
        compensate the Administrator for the costs of the services 
        provided.
            ``(2) Amounts and personnel.--Amounts collected from 
        payments under this subsection shall be available to the 
        Administrator for obligation until expended, and personnel used 
        to provide such services shall not be counted against any 
        Federal employment ceilings affecting the Agency.''.
    (e) Technical Amendment.--Section 913(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
299b-2(c)) is amended by moving the first sentence so as appear after 
the subsection heading.

                      PART 2--FUNDING FOR PROGRAM

SEC. 3211. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Relation to Other Funds.--Amounts made available under this 
subtitle are in addition to any other authorizations of appropriations 
that are available to carry out section 3202 and the amendments made by 
such section.
    (b) Trigger and Release of Monies.--No expenditure shall be made 
pursuant to section 3201(b) during any fiscal year in which the annual 
amount appropriated for the National Institutes of Health and the 
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research is less than the amount so 
appropriated for the prior fiscal year. With respect to amounts 
available for expenditure pursuant to section 3201(b) which, as a 
result of the application of this subsection remain unexpended, such 
amounts shall be obligated by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services under the public health initiative under subtitle H.

                PART 3--MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY IMPACT STUDY

SEC. 3221. MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY IMPACT STUDY.

    (a) Assessment of the Standard Impact of Medical Technologies.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Administrator of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research 
        (hereafter referred to in this section as the 
        ``Administrator''), shall undertake an interdisciplinary study 
        (to be known as the ``Medical Technology Impact Study'') to 
        assess the overall economic costs, economic benefits, and 
        effect on patient outcomes of medical technologies used in 
        treating each of a list of target diseases and conditions. The 
        Secretary shall submit the report of the Administrator to 
        Congress (in accordance with subsection (c)) concerning the 
        results of the study and may provide any recommendations 
        determined to be necessary to ensure the availability, access, 
        and appropriate use of medical technologies to improve the 
        quality of health care in the United States.
            (2) Purpose.--The purpose of the study under paragraph (1) 
        is to assess the impact of old, new, and emerging medical 
        technologies on health care costs, social costs, and patient 
        outcomes, and to identify the factors, including government and 
        private payor reimbursement policies, that impede or encourage 
        innovation that improves patient outcomes. Congress intends 
        that the study complement the technology assessment, outcomes 
        research, and guideline development activities authorized under 
        title IX of the Public Health Service Act by providing a 
        comprehensive context for understanding the economic and social 
        factors related to the development and use of medical 
        technologies.
            (3) Definitions.--As used in this section:
                    (A) Economic benefits.--The term ``economic 
                benefits'' may include, based on available data--
                            (i) reductions in the economic costs of 
                        disease;
                            (ii) increases in employment attributable 
                        to the medical technology industry;
                            (iii) increases in Federal and State tax 
                        revenues attributable to the medical technology 
                        industry and its employees;
                            (iv) improvements in the balance of trade 
                        deficit attributable to the medical technology 
                        industry; and
                            (v) other benefits that are determined by 
                        the Advisory Committee established under 
                        subsection (b) to be relevant to assessing the 
                        impact of medical technology.
                    (B) Economic costs.--The term `economic costs' may 
                include, based on available data--
                            (i) the financial costs to the health care 
                        system of diagnosing and treating disease, 
                        including the costs of nontreatment and 
                        palliative care;
                            (ii) the financial costs to employers 
                        resulting from worker illness, including the 
                        costs of productivity losses and worker 
                        absenteeism;
                            (iii) the financial costs to families 
                        resulting from illness of a family member, 
                        including costs associated with loss of income, 
                        hiring of caretakers, and long term and hospice 
                        care;
                            (iv) the financial costs to government of 
                        illness, including reductions in income tax 
                        revenues attributable to worker illness and 
                        worker related injuries and increases in 
                        transfer payments, including unemployment, 
                        disability, welfare, and survivor benefit 
                        payments, made to individuals and families on 
                        account of illness; and
                            (v) other costs that are determined by the 
                        Advisory Committee established under subsection 
                        (b) to be relevant to assessing the impact of 
                        medical technology.
                    (C) Medical technologies.--The term `medical 
                technologies' includes drugs, biologics (including 
                vaccines), medical devices, drug delivery systems, and 
                surgical services and other procedures for preventing, 
                diagnosing, and treating diseases or health conditions.
                    (D) Medical technology industry.--The term `medical 
                technology industry' includes the biotechnology, 
                pharmaceutical, and medical device industries, and such 
                other industries that invent, develop, or market 
                medical technologies.
                    (E) Patient outcomes.--The term `patient outcomes' 
                may include--
                            (i) changes in clinical outcomes, including 
                        stabilization of patients with progressive 
                        disease or health conditions, resulting from 
                        the use of safe and effective medical 
                        technology in prevention, diagnosis, or 
                        treatment;
                            (ii) changes in mortality, morbidity, and 
                        health service use, including stabilization of 
                        patients with progressive diseases;
                            (iii) changes in quality of life, including 
                        ability to perform activities of daily living, 
                        ability to return to work, relief from 
                        discomfort or pain, alleviation of fatigue, and 
                        improved mental functioning and well-being; and
                            (iv) other outcomes that are determined by 
                        the Advisory Committee to be relevant to 
                        assessing the impact of medical technology.
    (b) Advisory Committee.--
            (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish an 
        Advisory Committee to assist the Agency for Health Care Policy 
        and Research in preparing the reports required under subsection 
        (c). Except as provided in paragraph (3), no member of the 
        Advisory Committee shall be an employee of the Federal 
        Government.
            (2) Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall be balanced 
        in its representation of interested parties and shall be 
        composed of at least two individuals appointed by the President 
        of the Institute of Medicine and two individuals from each of 
        the following categories to be appointed by the Administrator:
                    (A) Experts in medical technology assessment.
                    (B) Experts in objective measures of improved 
                patient outcomes, such as clinical outcomes, mortality, 
                morbidity, and health service use.
                    (C) Experts in subjective measures of improved 
                patient outcomes, such as quality of life.
                    (D) Experts in quantifying the economic costs of 
                disease to the health care system, including public and 
                private payers.
                    (E) Experts in quantifying the economic impact of 
                the medical technology industry.
                    (F) Experts in health statistics and epidemiology.
                    (G) Physicians and other health care providers.
                    (H) Officers or employees of health plans and other 
                health care payers.
                    (I) Experts in the ethical implications of health 
                care.
                    (J) Experts in private sector financial market 
                investment in the medical technology industry.
                    (K) Consumers and members of patient advocacy 
                groups.
                    (L) Health professional organizations.
                    (M) Officers or employees of biotechnology 
                companies.
                    (N) Officers or employees of medical device 
                companies.
                    (O) Officers or employees of pharmaceutical 
                companies.
            (3) Ex officio.--The following individuals or their 
        designees shall serve as ex officio members of the Advisory 
        Committee:
                    (A) The Director of the National Institutes of 
                Health.
                    (B) The Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
                    (C) The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
                and Prevention.
                    (D) The Administrator of the Health Care Financing 
                Administration.
                    (E) The Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology.
                    (F) The Director of the Congressional Office of 
                Technology Assessment.
    (c) Interdisciplinary Study and Report.--
            (1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
        the Advisory Committee established under subsection (b), shall 
        determine which diseases or conditions should be studied in the 
        Medical Technology Impact Study under subsection (a). In 
        carrying out the medical technology assessment required under 
        this subsection, the Administrator shall consider various 
        factors, including those outlined in section 904(b)(2) of the 
        Public Health Service Act and government and private payor 
        reimbursement policies that impede or encourage innovation that 
        improves patient outcomes. The diseases or conditions studied 
        in such Study shall be those considered to be high priority 
        according to the following criteria:
                    (A) Aggregate economic costs to the United States.
                    (B) Overall importance to public heath.
                    (C) Potential for improvements in patient outcomes.
                    (D) Significant changes expected in management of 
                the condition.
                    (E) Other criteria identified by the Advisory 
                Committee.
            (2) Design.--The Administrator, in consultation with the 
        Advisory Committee established under subsection (b), and the 
        Institute of Medicine pursuant to paragraph (3), shall develop 
        a design, based on the list of target diseases and conditions, 
        for undertaking the Medical Technology Impact Study under 
        subsection (a).
            (3) Contract.--The Secretary shall request the Institute of 
        Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences to enter into a 
        contract to review the design of the Medical Technology Impact 
        Study under subsection (a) and report to the Administrator 
        concerning any recommendations for revising such design, in the 
        interest of assuring that it reflects the best available 
        scientific methodologies.
            (4) Publication.--The Administrator shall publish the study 
        design under this section and list of target diseases and 
        conditions, the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine, 
        and the response of the Administrator to such recommendations 
        in the Federal Register for a 60-day period for public comment. 
        Any such comments shall be considered by the Administrator in 
        completing the proposed study design for submission to the 
        Secretary.
            (5) Design report.--The Secretary shall report to Congress 
        concerning the proposed design of the Medical Technology Impact 
        Study, together with recommendations for appropriations 
        necessary to carry out the Study.
            (6) Grants and contracts.--Beginning in the first fiscal 
        year for which Congress appropriates funds under subsection 
        (d), and ending on September 30 of that year, the Administrator 
        shall enter into grants and contracts with appropriate entities 
        to conduct any investigations and analyses that may be required 
        to carry out the design of the Medical Technology Impact Study 
        under subsection (a).
            (7) Report on findings.--The Administrator, in consultation 
        with the Advisory Committee established under subsection (b), 
        shall develop a draft comprehensive report concerning the 
        findings of the Medical Technology Impact Study under 
        subsection (a), shall make copies of the draft report available 
        to the public, and shall publish a notice in the Federal 
        Register providing for a 60-day period of public comment. Any 
        such comments shall be considered by the Administrator in 
        completing and submitting the final report to the Secretary.
            (8) Final report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
        enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit the 
        report of the Administrator under this section to Congress, and 
        may include any recommendations determined necessary to assure 
        the availability, access and appropriate use of medical 
        technologies to improve the quality of health care in the 
        United States.
    (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

    Subtitle D--Core Functions of Public Health Programs; National 
                Initiatives Regarding Preventive Health

                            PART 1--FUNDING

SEC. 3301. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Core Functions of Public Health Programs.--For the purpose of 
carrying out part 2, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$123,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $184,500,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
$266,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, $348,500,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
$410,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $512,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, 
and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (b) National Initiatives Regarding Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention.--For the purpose of carrying out part 3, there are 
authorized to be appropriated $102,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 
1996 through 1998, $123,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 and 
2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (c) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsections (a) and (b) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purposes 
described in such subsections.

            PART 2--CORE FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS

SEC. 3311. PURPOSES.

    Subject to the subsequent provisions of this subtitle, the purposes 
of this part are to strengthen the capacity of State and local public 
health agencies to carry out the following functions:
            (1) To monitor and protect the health of communities 
        against communicable diseases and exposure to toxic 
        environmental pollutants, occupational hazards, harmful 
        products, and poor quality health care.
            (2) To identify and control outbreaks of infectious disease 
        and patterns of chronic disease and injury.
            (3) To inform and educate health care consumers and 
        providers about their roles in preventing injury, preventing 
        and controlling disease and the appropriate use of medical 
        services.
            (4) To develop and test new prevention and public health 
        control interventions.
            (5) To integrate and coordinate the prevention programs and 
        services of standard health plans, community-based providers, 
        local health departments, State health departments, purchasing 
        cooperatives, and other sectors of State and local government 
        that affect health, including education, labor, transportation, 
        welfare, criminal justice, environment, agriculture, and 
        housing.
            (6) To conduct research on the effectiveness and cost-
        effectiveness of public health programs.

SEC. 3312. GRANTS TO STATES FOR CORE FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to States that 
submit applications as prescribed in section 3313 in an amount which 
bears the same ratio to the available amounts for that fiscal year as 
the amounts provided by the Secretary under the provisions of law 
listed in section 1902(2) of the Public Health Service Act to the State 
for fiscal year 1981 bear to the total amount appropriated for such 
provisions of law for fiscal year 1981.
    (b) Core Functions of Public Health Programs.--For purposes of 
subsection (a), the functions described in this subsection are, subject 
to subsection (c), as follows:
            (1)(A) Data collection, activities related to population 
        health (including the population of individuals ineligible for 
        the comprehensive benefit package) measurement and outcomes 
        monitoring, including the acquisition and installation of 
        hardware and software, personnel training and technical 
        assistance to operate and support automated and integrated 
        information systems, the regular collection and analysis of 
        public health data, vital statistics, and personal health 
        services data and analysis for planning and needs assessment 
        purposes of data collected from health plans through the 
        information system under title V of this Act.
            (B) Data measures under this paragraph must include an 
        ethnic identifier on all forms. To the extent feasible, ethnic 
        identifiers should be classified by ethnic sub-group 
        populations. Access to data must be ensured for research 
        organizations and data clearinghouses. Population health 
        measurement and outcome monitoring should focus on health 
        status differentials between racial, and ethnic groups, by 
        subpopulation, and gender differences.
            (2) Activities to protect the environment and to assure the 
        safety of housing, workplaces, food and water, including the 
        following activities:
                    (A) Monitoring and improving the overall public 
                health quality and safety of communities.
                    (B) Assessing exposure to high lead levels and 
                water contamination.
                    (C) Providing support for poison control centers.
                    (D) Monitoring sewage and solid waste disposal, 
                radiation exposure, radon exposure, and noise levels.
                    (E) Abatement of lead-related hazards.
                    (F) Assuring recreation, home and worker safety.
                    (G) Public information and education programs that 
                help to reduce intentional and unintentional injuries, 
                including training parents and children on use of 
                safety devices.
                    (H) Enforcing public health safety and sanitary 
                codes.
                    (I) Other activities relating to promoting the 
                public health of communities.
            (3) Investigation and control of adverse health conditions, 
        including improvements in emergency treatment preparedness, 
        injury prevention, cooperative activities to reduce violence 
        levels in homes and communities, activities to control the 
        outbreak of disease, exposure related conditions and other 
        threats to the health status of individuals.
            (4) Public information and education programs to reduce 
        risks to health such as use of tobacco, alcohol and other 
        drugs, sexual activities that increase the risk to HIV 
        transmission and sexually transmitted diseases, domestic 
        violence, poor diet, physical inactivity, and low childhood 
        immunization levels.
            (5) Accountability and quality assurance activities, 
        including monitoring the quality of personal health services 
        furnished by health plans and providers of medical and health 
        services in a manner consistent with the overall quality of 
        care monitoring activities undertaken under title V, and 
        monitoring communities' overall access to health services.
            (6) Provision of public health laboratory services to 
        complement private clinical laboratory services and that screen 
        for diseases and conditions such as metabolic diseases in 
        newborns, provide toxicology assessments of blood lead levels 
        and other environmental toxins, diagnose sexually transmitted 
        diseases, tuberculosis and other diseases requiring partner 
        notification, test for infectious and food-borne diseases, and 
        monitor the safety of water and food supplies.
            (7) Training and education to assure provision of care by 
        all health professionals, with special emphasis placed on the 
        training of public health professions including 
        epidemiologists, biostatisticians, health educators, public 
        health administrators, sanitarians and laboratory technicians.
            (8) Leadership, policy development and administration 
        activities, including needs assessment, the setting of public 
        health standards, the development of community public health 
        policies, and the development of community public health 
        coalitions.
            (9) Establishment of programs that encourage partnerships 
        among local law enforcement and community groups for the 
        purpose of developing community response teams to assist 
        victims of domestic violence.
    (c) Restrictions on Use of Grant.--
             (1) In general.--A funding agreement for a grant under 
        subsection (a) for a State is that the grant will not be 
        expended--
                    (A) to provide inpatient services;
                    (B) to make cash payments to intended recipients of 
                health services;
                    (C) to purchase or improve land, purchase, 
                construct, or permanently improve (other than minor 
                remodeling) any building or other facility, or purchase 
                major medical equipment;
                    (D) to satisfy any requirement for the expenditure 
                of non-Federal funds as a condition for the receipt of 
                Federal funds; or
                    (E) to provide financial assistance to any entity 
                other than a public or nonprofit private entity.
            (2) Limitation on administrative expenses.--A funding 
        agreement for a grant under subsection (a) is that the State 
        involved will not expend more than 10 percent of the grant for 
        administrative expenses with respect to the grant.
    (d) Maintenance of Effort.--A funding agreement for a grant under 
subsection (a) is that the State involved will maintain expenditures of 
non-Federal amounts for core health functions at a level that is not 
less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the State for 
the fiscal year preceding the first fiscal year for which the State 
receives such a grant.

SEC. 3313. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.

    The Secretary may make a grant under section 3312 only if the State 
involved submits to the Secretary the following information:
            (1) A description of existing deficiencies in the State's 
        public health system (at the State level and the local level), 
        using standards of sufficiency developed by the Secretary.
            (2) A description of health status measures to be improved 
        within the State (at the State level and the local level) 
        through expanded public health functions.
            (3) Measurable outcomes and process objectives for 
        improving health status and core health functions for which the 
        grant is to be expended.
            (4) Information regarding each such function, which--
                    (A) identifies the amount of State and local 
                funding expended on each such function for the fiscal 
                year preceding the fiscal year for which the grant is 
                sought; and
                    (B) provides a detailed description of how 
                additional Federal funding will improve each such 
                function by both the State and local public health 
                agencies.
            (5) A description of the core health functions to be 
        carried out at the local level, and a specification for each 
        such function of--
                    (A) the communities in which the function will be 
                carried out; and
                    (B) the amount of the grant to be expended for the 
                function in each community so specified.

SEC. 3314. REPORTS.

    A funding agreement for a grant under section 3312 is that the 
States involved will, not later than the date specified by the 
Secretary, submit to the Secretary a report describing--
            (1) the purposes for which the grant was expended; and
            (2) describing the extent of progress made by the State in 
        achieving measurable outcomes and process objectives described 
        in section 3313(3).

SEC. 3315. APPLICATION FOR GRANT.

    The Secretary may make a grant under section 3312 only if an 
application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this part, the 
application contains the information required in section 3314, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this part.

SEC. 3316. ALLOCATIONS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.

    Of the amounts made available under section 3301 for a fiscal year 
for carrying out this part, the Secretary may reserve not more than 5 
percent for carrying out the following activities:
            (1) Technical assistance with respect to planning, 
        development, and operation of core health functions carried out 
        under section 3312, including provision of biostatistical and 
        epidemiological expertise and provision of laboratory 
        expertise.
            (2) Development and operation of a national information 
        network among State and local health agencies.
            (3) Program monitoring and evaluation of core health 
        functions carried out under section 3312.
            (4) Development of a unified electronic reporting mechanism 
        to improve the efficiency of administrative management 
        requirements regarding the provision of Federal grants to State 
        public health agencies.

SEC. 3317. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this part:
            (1) The term ``funding agreement'', with respect to a grant 
        under section 3312 to a State, means that the Secretary may 
        make the grant only if the State makes the agreement involved.
            (2) The term ``core health functions'', with respect to a 
        State, means the functions described in section 3312(b).

SEC. 3318. SINGLE APPLICATION AND UNIFORM REPORTING SYSTEMS FOR CORE 
              FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND PUBLIC HEALTH CATEGORICAL 
              GRANT PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE 
              CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

    (a) Single Application.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
        of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
        establish a single consolidated application to enable States to 
        apply for the Core Functions of Public Health Grants Program 
        and any or all of the Public Health Service Act categorical 
        programs described in subsection (b).
            (2) Requirements.--The application developed under 
        paragraph (1) shall--
                    (A) be designed so that information collected will 
                be consistent with the requirements of this part 
                including subsection (b);
                    (B) be designed and implemented not later than 1 
                year after the date of enactment of this Act; and
                    (C) be developed with resources made available 
                under section 3316 (not resources made available for 
                the programs described in subsection (b)).
            (3) State public health officers.--In developing the single 
        consolidated application form to be used under this subsection 
        the Secretary shall consult with Federal, State and local 
        public health agencies.''.
            (4) Eligibility.--States and local governments that have 
        grants, contracts or cooperative agreements in effect with the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on the date of 
        enactment of this Act shall be eligible to use a single 
        application under this section to apply for any or all of the 
        Public Health Service Act categorical programs described in 
        subsection (b).
    (b) Eligible Public Health Service Act Programs.--Eligible Public 
Health Service Act categorical programs described in this subsection 
are the following:
            (1) The Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant 
        under section 1903 of the Public Health Service Act.
            (2) The Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program under 
        section 317A of the Public Health Service Act.
            (3) The Sexually Transmitted Diseases Program under section 
        318 of the Public Health Service Act.
            (4) The Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Diseases-Related 
        Infertility Program under section 318A of the Public Health 
        Service Act.
            (5) The Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program 
        under sections 1501 through 1509 of the Public Health Service 
        Act.
            (6) The National Program of Cancer Registries under section 
        399H of the Public Health Service Act.
            (7) The Injury Control and Prevention Program under 
        sections 391 through 394 of the Public Health Service Act.
            (8) The preventive health for prostate cancer program under 
        section 317D of the Public Health Service Act.
            (9) The birth defects data program under section 317C of 
        the Public Health Service Act.
            (10) Programs under subtitle D of this title.
            (11) Other relevant programs as determined appropriate by 
        the Secretary.
    (c) Allocation of Funds.--In awarding grants to States and local 
governments under a single application under this section, the 
Secretary shall delineate to each grantee the amounts to be dedicated 
to each of the programs described in subsection (b) and ensure that 
funding allotments for each of such programs are consistent with the 
requirements of Federal law.
    (d) Uniform Core Functions of Public Health Reporting System.--
            (1) Development.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
        Promotion and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
        and Prevention, in consultation with other relevant Federal and 
        State health agencies with data collection responsibilities, 
        shall develop and implement a Uniform Core Public Health 
        Functions Reporting System to collect program and fiscal data 
        concerning the programs described in subsection (b).
            (2) Requirements.--The system developed under paragraph (1) 
        shall--
                    (A) use outcomes consistent with the goals of 
                Healthy People 2000;
                    (B) be designed so that information collected will 
                be consistent with the requirements of this part 
                including subsection (b);
                    (C) be designed and implemented not later than 2 
                years after the date of enactment of this Act; and
                    (D) be developed with resources made available 
                under section 3316 of this Act (not resources made 
                available for the programs described in subsection 
                (b)).
            (3) State public health officers.--In developing the data 
        set to be used under Uniform Core Public Health Functions 
        Reporting System the Secretary shall consult with Federal, 
        State and local public health agencies.
    (e) Study.--
            (1) In general.--Within a reasonable period of time after 
        the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall request 
        that the Institute of Medicine conduct a study concerning--
                    (A) the effects of consolidating any or all of the 
                grant programs administered by the Centers for Disease 
                Control and Prevention and described in subsection (b) 
                into a Core Functions of Public Health Block Grant 
                Program;
                    (B) the development of alternative methods for 
                implementing a block grant program or categorical grant 
                program; and
                    (C) alternative formulas for allocating State 
                grants that incorporate measures of health status, 
                population and degree of poverty.
        In particular, the impact of program consolidation on the 
        targeted recipients, including women and vulnerable 
        populations, shall be addressed in the study. If the Institute 
        of Medicine declines to do the study, the Secretary shall make 
        grants to or enter into contracts with a public or nonprofit 
        private entity with relevant expertise for the conduct of such 
        a study.
            (2) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
        receipt of the contract under paragraph (1), the contract 
        recipient shall prepare and submit to the Secretary, the Energy 
        and Commerce Committee of the House of Representatives, and the 
        Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate a report 
        that contains the results of the study conducted under 
        paragraph (1).
            (3) Issuance of plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
        on which the report under paragraph (2) is received by the 
        Secretary and the committees referred to in such paragraph, the 
        Secretary shall issue a plan in response to the report. Such a 
        plan shall include the identification of relevant changes in 
        authorizing language.

  PART 3--NATIONAL INITIATIVES REGARDING HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE 
                               PREVENTION

                       Subpart A--General Grants

SEC. 3331. GRANTS FOR NATIONAL PREVENTION INITIATIVES.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to entities 
described in subsection (b) for the purpose of carrying out projects to 
develop and implement innovative community-based strategies to provide 
for health promotion and disease prevention activities for which there 
is a significant need, as identified under section 1701 of the Public 
Health Service Act.
    (b) Eligible Entities.--The entities referred to in subsection (a) 
are agencies of State or local government, private nonprofit 
organizations (including research institutions), and coalitions that 
link two or more of these groups.
    (c) Certain Activities.--The Secretary shall ensure that projects 
carried out under subsection (a)--
            (1) reflect approaches that take into account the special 
        needs and concerns of the affected populations;
            (2) are targeted to the most needy and vulnerable 
        population groups and geographic areas of the Nation;
            (3) examine links between various high priority preventable 
        health problems and the potential community-based remedial 
        actions; and
            (4) establish or strengthen the links between the 
        activities of agencies engaged in public health activities with 
        those of purchasing cooperatives, health care providers, and 
        other entities involved in the personal health care delivery 
        system described in title I.

SEC. 3332. PRIORITIES.

    (a) Establishment.--
            (1) Annual statement.--The Secretary shall for each fiscal 
        year develop a statement of proposed priorities for grants 
        under section 3331 for the fiscal year.
            (2) Allocations among priorities.--With respect to the 
        amounts available under section 3301(b) for the fiscal year for 
        carrying out this part, each statement under paragraph (1) for 
        a fiscal year shall include a specification of the percentage 
        of the amount to be devoted to projects addressing each of the 
        proposed priorities established in the statement.
            (3) Process for establishing priorities.--
                    (A) Preference.--In establishing priorities for 
                grants under this part, preference shall be given to 
                projects that--
                            (i) reduce the prevalence of chronic 
                        diseases including cardiovascular disease, 
                        stroke, diabetes, and cancer;
                            (ii) prevent violence against women by 
                        training providers and other health care 
                        professionals to identify victims of domestic 
                        violence, to provide appropriate examination 
                        and treatment, and to refer the victims for 
                        appropriate social and legal services; and
                            (iii) establish community health advisor 
                        programs described in subparagraph (B).
                    (B) Community health advisor programs.--For 
                purposes of subparagraph (A)(iii), the term ``community 
                health advisor program'' means a program that performs 
                the following functions:
                            (i) Provides outreach services to inform 
                        the community of the availability of program 
                        services.
                            (ii) Collaborate efforts with health care 
                        providers and related entities to facilitate 
                        the provision of health services and health 
                        related social services.
                            (iii) Provide public education on health 
                        promotion and disease prevention and efforts to 
                        facilitate the use of available health services 
                        and health-related social services.
                            (iv) Provide health-related counseling.
                            (v) Make referrals for available health 
                        services and health-related social services.
                            (vi) Improve the ability of individuals to 
                        use health services and health-related social 
                        services under Federal, State, and local 
                        programs, through assisting individuals in 
                        establishing eligibility under the programs.
                            (vii) Establish a community health advisor 
                        training program.
                            (viii) Provide services in the language and 
                        cultural context most appropriate for the 
                        individuals served by the program.
                            (ix) Provide compensation for the services 
                        of, and opportunities for training and 
                        employment of, community health advisors.
                            (x) Such other services as the Secretary 
                        determines to be appropriate, which may include 
                        transportation and translation services.
                    (C) Publication of statement.--Not later than 
                January 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
                publish a statement under paragraph (1) in the Federal 
                Register. A period of 60 days shall be allowed for the 
                submission of public comments and suggestions 
                concerning the proposed priorities. After analyzing and 
                considering comments on the proposed priorities, the 
                Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register final 
                priorities (and associated reservations of funds) for 
                approval of projects for the following fiscal year.
                    (D) Definition of community health advisor.--For 
                purposes of subparagraph (B), the term ``community 
                health advisor'' means an individual--
                            (i) who has demonstrated the capacity to 
                        carry out one or more of the authorized program 
                        services;
                            (ii) who, for not less than 1 year, has 
                        been a resident of the community in which the 
                        community health advisor program involved is to 
                        be operated; and
                            (iii) is a member of a socioeconomic group 
                        to be served by the program.
    (b) Applicability to Making of Grants.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants under 
        section 3331 for projects that the Secretary determines--
                    (A) are consistent with the applicable final 
                statement of priorities and otherwise meets the 
                objectives described in subsection (a); and
                    (B) will assist in meeting a health need or concern 
                of a population within a defined health care coverage 
                area or other service area.
            (2) Special consideration for certain projects.--In making 
        grants under section 3331, the Secretary shall give special 
        consideration to applicants that will carry out projects that, 
        in addition to being consistent with the applicable published 
        priorities under subsection (a) and otherwise meeting the 
        requirements of this part, have the potential for replication 
        in other communities.

SEC. 3333. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.

    The Secretary may make a grant under section 3331 only if the 
applicant involved submits to the Secretary the following information:
            (1) A description of the activities to be conducted, and 
        the manner in which the activities are expected to contribute 
        to meeting one or more of the priority health needs specified 
        under section 3332 for the fiscal year for which the grant is 
        initially sought.
            (2) A description of the total amount of Federal funding 
        requested, the geographic area and populations to be served, 
        and the evaluation procedures to be followed.
            (3) Such other information as the Secretary determines to 
        be appropriate.

SEC. 3334. APPLICATION FOR GRANT.

    The Secretary may make a grant under section 3331 only if an 
application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this part, the 
application contains the information required in section 3333, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this part.

   Subpart B--Development of Telemedicine in Rural Underserved Areas

SEC. 3341. GRANTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL TELEMEDICINE.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Grants awarded.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Office of Rural Health Policy, shall award grants to eligible 
        entities that have applications approved under subsection (b) 
        for the purpose of expanding access to health care services for 
        individuals in rural areas through the use of telemedicine. 
        Grants shall be awarded under this section to encourage the 
        initial development of rural telemedicine networks, expand 
        existing networks, link existing networks together, or link 
        such networks to existing fiber optic telecommunications 
        systems.
            (2) Eligible entity.--For purposes of this section, the 
        term ``eligible entity'' means a public or nonprofit entity 
        operating in a nonmetropolitan area (as defined by the 
        Secretary of Commerce) as part of a network of community-based 
        providers that includes at least three of the following:
                    (A) Community or migrant health centers.
                    (B) Local health departments.
                    (C) Community mental health centers.
                    (D) Nonprofit hospitals.
                    (E) Private practice health professionals, 
                including rural health clinics.
                    (F) Other publicly funded health or social services 
                agencies.
    (b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section an entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require, including a description of 
the use to which the entity will apply any amounts received under the 
grant.
    (c) Preference.--The Secretary shall, in awarding grants under this 
section, give preference to applicants that--
            (1) are health care providers in rural health care networks 
        or providers that propose to form such networks, and the 
        majority of the providers in such a network are located in a 
        medically underserved or health professional shortage areas;
            (2) can demonstrate broad geographic coverage in the rural 
        areas of the State, or States in which the applicant is 
        located;
            (3) propose to use Federal funds to develop plans for, or 
        to establish, telemedicine systems that will link rural 
        hospitals and rural health care providers to other hospitals 
        and health care providers;
            (4) will use the amounts provided under the grant for a 
        range of health care applications such as teleradiology, 
        telepathology, interactive video consultation and remote 
        educational services, and to promote greater efficiency in the 
        use of health care resources; and
            (5) propose to use local matching funds to finance 
        projects.
    (d) Use of Amounts.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under 
this section shall be utilized for the development of telemedicine 
networks involving two or more providers. Such amounts may be used to 
cover the costs associated with the development of telemedicine 
networks and the acquisition or construction of telecommunications 
facilities and equipment including--
            (1) the development and acquisition through lease or 
        purchase of computer hardware and software, audio and visual 
        equipment, computer network equipment, telecommunications 
        transmission facilities, telecommunications terminal 
        equipments, interactive video equipment, data terminal 
        equipment, and other facilities and equipment that would 
        further the purposes of this section;
            (2) the provision of technical assistance and instruction 
        for the development and use of such programming equipment or 
        facilities;
            (3) the development and acquisition of instructional 
        programming;
            (4) demonstration projects for teaching or training medical 
        students, residents, and other health professions students in 
        rural training sites about the application of telemedicine;
            (5) transmission costs, maintenance of equipment, and 
        compensation of specialists and referring practitioners;
            (6) demonstration projects to use telemedicine to 
        facilitate collaboration between physicians and nonphysician 
        primary care practitioners such as physician assistants, nurse 
        practitioners, and certified nurse-midwives; or
            (7) such other uses that are consistent with achieving the 
        purposes of this section as approved by the Secretary.
    (e) Prohibited Uses.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under 
this section may not be used for any of the following:
            (1) Expenditures to purchase or lease equipment to the 
        extent the expenditures would exceed more than 60 percent of 
        the total grant funds.
            (2) Expenditures for indirect costs (as determined by the 
        Secretary) to the extent the expenditures would exceed more 
        than 10 percent of the total grant funds.

SEC. 3342. REPORT AND EVALUATION OF TELEMEDICINE.

    Not later than the date that is 3 years after the date on which the 
first grant is awarded under section 3341, the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Administrator of the Rural Electrification 
Administration, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and other agencies 
and departments that have responsibilities for overseeing telemedicine 
projects, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of 
Congress a report that evaluates telemedicine in the United States. 
Such report shall contain an evaluation of--
            (1) whether telemedicine expands access to health care 
        services;
            (2) the cost effectiveness of telemedicine services; and
            (3) the quality of telemedicine services delivered.

SEC. 3343. REGULATIONS ON REIMBURSEMENT OF TELEMEDICINE.

    Not later than July 1, 1996, the Secretary, in consultation with 
the Director of the Office of Rural Health and the Administrator of the 
Health Care Financing Administration, shall issue regulations 
concerning reimbursement for telemedicine services provided under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act.

SEC. 3344. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary to carry out this subpart.

SEC. 3345. DEFINITIONS.

    As used in this part:
            (1) Computer networks.--The term ``computer networks'' 
        means computer hardware and software, terminals, signal 
        conversion equipment including both modulators and 
        demodulators, or related devices, used to communicate with 
        other computers to process and exchange date through a 
        telecommunication network in which signals are generated, 
        modified, or prepared for transmission, or received, via 
        telecommunications terminal equipment and telecommunications 
        transmission facilities.
            (2) Data terminal equipment.--The term ``data terminal 
        equipment'' means equipment that converts user information into 
        data signals for transmission, or reconverts the received data 
        signals into user information, and is normally found on the 
        terminal of a circuit and on the premises of the end user.
            (3) Fiber optic cable.--The term ``fiber optic cable'' 
        means a bundle of optical transmission elements or waveguides 
        usually consisting of a fiber core and fiber cladding that can 
        guide a lightwave and that are incorporated into an assembly of 
        materials that provide tensile strength and external 
        protection.
            (4) Interactive video equipment.--The term ``interactive 
        video equipment'' means equipment used to produce and prepare 
        for transmission audio and visual signals from at least two 
        distant locations in order that individuals at such locations 
        can verbally and visually communicate with each other, and such 
        equipment includes monitors, other display devices, cameras or 
        other recording devices, audio pick-up devices, and other 
        related equipment.
            (5) Rural health care network.--The term ``rural health 
        care network'' means a group of rural hospitals or other rural 
        care health care providers (including clinics, physicians and 
        non-physicians primary care providers) that have entered into a 
        formal relationship with each other or with nonrural hospitals 
        and health care providers for the purpose of strengthening the 
        delivery of health care services in rural areas or specifically 
        to improve their patients' access to telemedicine services. At 
        least 75 percent of hospitals and other health care providers 
        participating in the network shall be located in rural areas.
            (6) Telecommunication transmission facilities.--The term 
        ``telecommunications transmission facilities'' means those 
        facilities that transmit, receive, or carry data between the 
        telecommunications terminal equipment at each end of a 
        telecommunications circuit or path. Such facilities include 
        microwave antennae, relay stations and towers, other 
        telecommunications antennae, fiber-optic cables and repeaters, 
        coaxial cables, communication satellite ground station 
        complexes, copper cable electronic equipment associated with 
        telecommunications transmissions, and similar items as defined 
        by the Secretary.
            (7) Telecommunication terminal equipment.--The term 
        ``telecommunications terminal equipment'' means the assembly of 
        telecommunications equipment at the end of a circuit, normally 
        located on the premises of the end user, that interfaces with 
        telecommunications transmission facilities, and that is used to 
        modify, convert, encode, or otherwise prepare signals to be 
        transmitted via such telecommunications facilities, or that is 
        used to modify, reconvert or carry signals received from such 
        facilities, the purpose of which is to accomplish the goal for 
        which the circuit was established.

   Subtitle E--Health Services for Medically Underserved Populations

             PART 1--INITIATIVES FOR ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

               Subpart A--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 3411. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Improving Access to Health Services.--
            (1) Subpart b.--
                    (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), for the 
                purpose of carrying out subpart B, there are authorized 
                to be appropriated $105,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
                $245,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $385,000,000 for 
                fiscal year 1997, $315,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
                $245,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $105,000,000 for 
                fiscal year 2000.
                    (B) With respect to awards to federally qualified 
                health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
                the Social Security Act) and rural health clinics under 
                subpart B, there are authorized to be appropriated 
                $45,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $105,000,000 for 
                fiscal year 1996, $165,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
                $135,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, $105,000,000 for 
                fiscal year 1999, and $45,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
            (2) Subpart c.--
                    (A) For the purpose of providing loans under 
                subpart C, there are authorized to be appropriated such 
                sums as may be necessary to support a loan level of 
                $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 
                2000.
                    (B) For the purpose of making grants under subpart 
                C, there are authorized to be appropriated $35,000,000 
                for each of the fiscal year 1995 through 2000.
    (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.
    (c) Eligible Entities.--For purposes of this part, the term 
``eligible entities'' means--
            (1) covered entities as defined in section 340B(a)(4) of 
        the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)(4)), except 
        that subsection (a)(4)(L)(iii) and (a)(7) of such section shall 
        not apply;
            (2) school health service sites under title III of this 
        Act;
            (3) nonprofit hospitals meeting the criteria for public 
        hospitals which are eligible entities under section 340B of the 
        Public Health Service Act, except that subsection 
        (a)(4)(L)(iii) of such section shall not apply, and children's 
        hospitals meeting comparable criteria as determined appropriate 
        by the Secretary;
            (4) public and private, nonprofit community mental health 
        centers and substance abuse treatment providers receiving funds 
        from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
        Administration;
            (5) runaway homeless youth centers or transitional living 
        programs for homeless youth for the provision of health 
        services under the Runaway Homeless Youth Act of 1974 (42 
        U.S.C. 5701 et seq.);
            (6) rural referral centers under section 1886(d)(5)(C) of 
        the Social Security Act, except that such eligibility is 
        restricted to the receipt of grants under section 3441; and
            (7) public or nonprofit entities in nonmetropolitan areas 
        (as defined by the Department of Commerce) in a consortium of 
        community-based providers that includes at least three of the 
        following:
                    (A) community or migrant health centers;
                    (B) local health departments;
                    (C) community mental health centers;
                    (D) nonprofit hospitals;
                    (E) private practice health professionals, 
                including rural health clinics; or
                    (F) other publicly funded health or social services 
                agencies;
        except that such eligibility is restricted to the receipt of 
        grants or contracts under section 3421(a).
    (d) Priority.--In making awards from amounts appropriated under 
subsection (a)(1)(B) and section 3462, the Secretary shall give the 
highest priority to providing adequate assistance to federally 
qualified health centers in order to ensure the provision of 
comprehensive primary health care services, other covered services and 
benefits, and enabling services to medically underserved populations 
that were served by such centers prior to the date of enactment of this 
Act, except that such federally qualified health centers must continue 
to meet the requirements for designation under section 1861(aa)(4) of 
the Social Security Act.
    (e) Equitable Distribution.--The Secretary shall, in awarding 
grants, entering into contracts, and making loans under this part, 
assure an equitable distribution of funds between rural and urban 
areas.

Subpart B--Development of Community Health Groups and Health Care Sites 
                              and Services

SEC. 3421. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PLANS AND NETWORKS 
              AND THE EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH CARE SITES 
              AND SERVICES.

    (a) Authority.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to and enter 
        into contracts with eligible entities described in section 
        3411(c) for--
                    (A) the development of community health groups 
                whose principal purpose is to provide the comprehensive 
                benefit package under title I in one or more health 
                professional shortage areas or to provide such items 
                and services to a significant number of individuals who 
                are members of a medically underserved population; and
                    (B) the expansion of existing health delivery sites 
                and services and the development of new health delivery 
                sites and services.
            (2) Consideration by secretary.--In awarding grants or 
        contracts under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give 
        consideration to--
                    (A) the geographic proximity of the grant 
                applicants and recipients;
                    (B) cultural and language differences existing 
                within the communities to be served under the grants or 
                contracts; and
                    (C) the capacity needs of the communities to be 
                served.
    (b) Service Area.--In making an award under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall designate the geographic area with respect to which the 
community health group involved is to provide health services.
    (c) Priority.--In making awards under subsection (a)(1), the 
Secretary shall give priority to proposals in which a greater number of 
eligible entities and other health care providers, especially providers 
in community-and provider-based health plans under section 1651(d), are 
participants in the community health group, except in areas such as 
rural areas, where providers are severely limited in number.
    (d) Limitation on Awards.--The Secretary may not make awards under 
subsection (a)(1) for more than 5 years to the same community health 
group.
    (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this subpart:
            (1) The term ``community health group'' means--
                    (A) a community health network that--
                            (i) is a public or nonprofit private 
                        consortium of health care providers that 
                        principally provides some of the items and 
                        services of the standard benefit package to 
                        medically underserved populations, and 
                        residents of health professional shortage 
                        areas;
                            (ii) has an agreement with one or more 
                        health plans; and
                            (iii) has a written agreement governing the 
                        participation of health care providers in the 
                        consortium to which each participating provider 
                        is a party; or
                    (B) a community health plan that--
                            (i) is a public or nonprofit private entity 
                        that principally provides all of the items and 
                        services of the standard benefit package to 
                        medically underserved populations, and 
                        residents of health professional shortage 
                        areas;
                            (ii) is a participant in one or more health 
                        alliances; and
                            (iii) has a written agreement governing the 
                        participation of health care providers in the 
                        consortium to which each participating provider 
                        is a party.
            (2) The term ``health professional shortage areas'' means 
        health professional shortage areas designated under section 332 
        of the Public Health Service Act.
            (3) The term ``medically underserved population'' means a 
        medically underserved population designated under section 
        330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act, populations 
        residing in health professional shortage areas under section 
        332 of the Public Health Service Act, and populations eligible 
        for premium subsidies and cost sharing reductions based on 
        income under title I.

SEC. 3422. CERTAIN USES OF AWARDS.

    (a) In General.--Amounts awarded under section 3421 may be expended 
for--
            (1) the development of a community health group, including 
        entering into contracts between the recipient of the award and 
        health care providers who are to participate in the group;
            (2) the expansion, development and on-going operation of 
        health delivery sites and services; and
            (3) activities under paragraphs (1) and (2) which include--
                    (A) the recruitment, compensation, and training of 
                health professionals and administrative staff;
                    (B) the purchase and upgrading of equipment, 
                supplies, and information systems including 
                telemedicine systems; and
                    (C) the establishment of reserves required for 
                furnishing services on a prepaid or capitated basis, 
                except that eligible entities may use non-cash 
                mechanisms (including bonds, letters of credit and 
                federally guaranteed reinsurance pools) for 
                establishing and maintaining financial reserves.
    (b) Loans and Grants.--The Secretary may expend, in any fiscal 
year, not to exceed 10 percent of the amounts appropriated to carry out 
this subpart to make loans and grants to eligible entities to support 
the types of activities described in section 3441, subject to the 
requirements of subpart C, except that, with respect to amounts 
available for non-federally qualified health center activities, such 
funds may be used to convert facilities from providers of acute care 
service to providers of primary, emergency or long-term care.

SEC. 3423. APPLICATION.

    The Secretary may not make an award to an entity under section 3421 
until such entity submits and application to the Secretary, in such 
form and containing such assurances and information as the Secretary 
determines appropriate, including--
            (1) an assessment of the need that the medically 
        underserved population or populations proposed to be served by 
        the applicant have for health services and for enabling 
        services (as defined in section 3461);
            (2) a description of how the applicant will design the 
        proposed community health plan or practice network (including 
        the service sites involved) for such populations based on the 
        assessment of need;
            (3) a description of efforts to secure financial and 
        professional assistance and support for the project; and
            (4) evidence of significant community involvement in the 
        initiation, development and ongoing operation of the project.

SEC. 3424. PURPOSES AND CONDITIONS.

    Grants shall be made under this subpart for the purposes and 
subject to all of the conditions under which eligible entities 
otherwise receive funding to provide health services to medically 
underserved populations under the Public Health Service Act. The 
Secretary shall prescribe comparable purposes and conditions for 
eligible entities not receiving funding under the Public Health Service 
Act.

 Subpart C--Capital Cost of Development of Community Health Groups and 
                             Other Purposes

SEC. 3441. DIRECT LOANS AND GRANTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants and loans to--
            (1) eligible entities (as defined in section 3412(c));
            (2) hospitals designated by the Secretary as essential 
        access community hospitals under section 1820(i)(1) of the 
        Social Security Act; or
            (3) rural primary care hospitals under section 1820(i)(2) 
        of such Act;
for the capital costs of developing community health groups (as defined 
in section 3421(e)) and expanding existing health delivery sites or 
developing new health delivery sites.
    (b) Use of Assistance.--
            (1) In general.--The capital costs for which grants and 
        loans made pursuant to subsection (a) may be expended are, 
        subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the following:
                    (A) The acquisition, modernization, expansion or 
                construction of facilities, or the conversion of 
                unneeded hospital facilities to facilities that will 
                assure or enhance the provision and accessibility of 
                health care and enabling services to medically 
                underserved populations.
                    (B) The purchase of major equipment, including 
                equipment necessary for the support of external and 
                internal information systems.
                    (C) The establishment of reserves required for 
                furnishing services on a prepaid or capitated basis.
                    (D) Such other capital costs as the Secretary may 
                determine are necessary to achieve the objectives of 
                this section.
            (2) Priorities regarding use of funds.--In providing grants 
        and loans under subsection (a) for an entity, the Secretary 
        shall give priority to authorizing the use of amounts for 
        projects for the renovation and modernization of medical 
        facilities necessary to prevent or eliminate safety hazards 
        including asbestos removal, avoid noncompliance with licensure 
        or accreditation standards, or projects to replace obsolete 
        facilities.
            (3) Limitation.--The Secretary may authorize the use of 
        grants and loans under subsection (a) for the construction of 
        new buildings only if the Secretary determines that appropriate 
        facilities are not available through acquiring, modernizing, 
        expanding or converting existing buildings, or that 
        construction new buildings will cost less.
    (c) Amount of Assistance.--
            (1) In general.--The principal amount of loans under 
        subsection (a) may cover up to 90 percent of the costs 
        involved.
            (2) Grants.--Grants under this subsection may not exceed 75 
        percent of the costs involved.
    (d) Interest Subsidies.--Amounts provided under this section may be 
used to provide interest subsidies for loans provided under this 
section where such subsidies are necessary to make a project financial 
feasible.

SEC. 3442. CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may approve a loan under section 
3441 only if--
            (1) the Secretary is reasonably satisfied that the 
        applicant for the project for which the loan would be made will 
        be able to make payments of principal and interest thereon when 
        due; and
            (2) the applicant provides the Secretary with reasonable 
        assurances that there will be available to it such additional 
        funds as may be necessary to complete the project or 
        undertaking with respect to which such loan is requested.
    (b) Terms and Conditions.--Any loan made under section 3441 shall, 
subject to the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990, meet such terms and 
conditions (including provisions for recovery in case of default) as 
the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, 
determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of such section 
while adequately protecting the financial interests of the United 
States. Terms and conditions for such loans shall include provisions 
regarding the following:
            (1) Security.
            (2) Maturity date.
            (3) Amount and frequency of installments.
            (4) Rate of interest, which shall be at a rate comparable 
        to the rate of interest prevailing on the date the loan is 
        made.

SEC. 3443. DEFAULTS; RIGHT OF RECOVERY.

    (a) Defaults.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary may take such action as may 
        be necessary to prevent a default on loans under section 3441, 
        including the waiver of regulatory conditions, deferral of loan 
        payments, renegotiation of loans, and the expenditure of funds 
        for technical and consultative assistance, for the temporary 
        payment of the interest and principal on such a loan, and for 
        other purposes.
            (2) Foreclosure.--The Secretary may take such action, 
        consistent with State law respecting foreclosure procedures, as 
        the Secretary deems appropriate to protect the interest of the 
        United States in the event of a default on a loan made pursuant 
        to section 3441, including selling real property pledged as 
        security for such a loan and for a reasonable period of time 
        taking possession of, holding, and using real property pledged 
        as security for such a loan.
            (3) Waivers.--The Secretary may, for good cause, but with 
        due regard to the financial interests of the United States, 
        waive any right of recovery which the Secretary has by reasons 
        of the failure of a borrower to make payments of principal of 
        and interest on a loan made pursuant to section 3441, except 
        that if such loan is sold and guaranteed, any such waiver shall 
        have no effect upon the Secretary's guarantee of timely payment 
        of principal and interest.
    (b) Twenty-Year Obligation; Right of Recovery; Subordination; 
Waivers.--
            (1) In general.--With respect to an eligible entity for 
        which a grant or loan was made under section 3441, the 
        Secretary may award the grant or loan only if the applicant 
        involved agrees that the applicant will be liable to the United 
        States for the amount of the grant or loan, together with an 
        amount representing interest, if at any time during the 20-year 
        period beginning on the date of completion of the activities 
        involved, the entity--
                    (A) ceases to be an eligible entity utilized by a 
                community health group, or by another public or 
                nonprofit private entity that provides health services 
                in one or more health professional shortage areas or 
                that provides such services to a significant number of 
                individuals who are members of a medically underserved 
                population; or
                    (B) is sold or transferred to any entity other than 
                an entity that is--
                            (i) a community health group or other 
                        entity described in subparagraph (A); and
                            (ii) approved by the Secretary as a 
                        purchaser or transferee regarding the facility.
            (2) Subordination; waivers.--With respect to essential 
        community providers, the Secretary may subordinate or waive the 
        right of recovery under paragraph (1), and any other Federal 
        interest that may be derived by virtue of a grant or loan under 
        section 3441, if the Secretary determines that subordination or 
        waiver will further the objectives of this part.

SEC. 3444. PROVISIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION OR EXPANSION OF 
              FACILITIES.

    (a) Submission of Information.--In the case of a project for 
construction, conversion, expansion or modernization of a facility, the 
Secretary may provide loans under section 3441 only if the applicant 
submits to the Secretary the following:
            (1) A description of the site.
            (2) Plans and specifications which meet requirements 
        prescribed by the Secretary.
            (3) Information reasonably demonstrating that title to such 
        site is vested in one or more of the entities filing the 
        application (unless the agreement described in subsection 
        (b)(1) is made).
            (4) A specification of the type of assistance being 
        requested under section 3441.
    (b) Agreements.--In the case of a project for construction, 
conversion, expansion or modernization of a facility, the Secretary may 
provide loans under section 3441 only if the applicant makes the 
following agreements:
            (1) Title to such site will be vested in one or more of the 
        entities filing the application (unless the assurance described 
        in subsection (a)(3) has been submitted under such subsection).
            (2) Adequate financial support will be available for 
        completion of the project and for its maintenance and operation 
        when completed.
            (3) All laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or 
        subcontractors in the performance of work on a project will be 
        paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing on similar 
        construction in the locality as determined by the Secretary of 
        Labor in accordance with the Act of March 3, 1931 (40 U.S.C. 
        276a et seq.; commonly known as the Davis-Bacon Act), and the 
        Secretary of Labor shall have with respect to such labor 
        standards the authority and functions set forth in 
        Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (15 FR 3176; 5 U.S.C. 
        Appendix) and section 276c of title 40.
            (4) The facility will be made available to all persons 
        seeking service regardless of their ability to pay.

SEC. 3445. APPLICATION FOR ASSISTANCE.

    The Secretary may provide loans under section 3441 only if an 
application for such assistance is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this subpart, the 
application contains the information required in section 3444(a), and 
the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains 
such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary 
determines to be necessary to carry out this subpart.

SEC. 3446. ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAMS.

    This subpart, and any other program of the Secretary that provides 
loans, shall be carried out by a centralized loan unit established 
within the Department of Health and Human Services.

             Subpart D--Enabling and Supplemental Services

SEC. 3461. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR ENABLING AND SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES.

    (a) Authority.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to and enter 
        into contracts with eligible entities to assist such entities 
        in providing the services described in subsections (b) and (c) 
        for the purpose of increasing the capacity of individuals to 
        utilize the items and services included in the comprehensive 
        benefits package under title I, and to provide access to 
        essential supplemental services that are not fully reimbursable 
        under title I prior to January 2001.
            (2) Consideration by secretary.--In awarding grants or 
        contracts under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give 
        consideration to--
                    (A) the geographic proximity of the grant 
                applicants and recipients;
                    (B) cultural and language differences existing 
                within the communities to be served under the grants or 
                contracts; and
                    (C) the capacity needs of the communities to be 
                served.
    (b) Enabling Services.--Enabling services shall include 
transportation, community and patient outreach, patient and family 
education, translation services, case management, home visiting, and 
such other services as the Secretary determines to be appropriate in 
carrying out the purpose described in such subsection.
    (c) Supplemental Services.--Supplemental services shall include 
items or services described in section 1106 or section 1118 of this Act 
that would otherwise be excluded from coverage prior to January 1, 
2001.
    (d) Certain Requirements Regarding Project Area.--The Secretary may 
make an award of a grant or contract under subsection (a) only if the 
applicant involved--
            (1) submits to the Secretary--
                    (A) information demonstrating that the medically 
                underserved populations in the community to be served 
                under the award have a need for enabling services; and
                    (B) a proposed budget for providing such services;
            (2) the applicant for the award agrees that the medically 
        underserved residents of the community will be consulted with 
        respect to the design and implementation of the project carried 
        out with the award;
            (3) agrees that the services will not be denied because the 
        individual is unable to pay for such services; and
            (4) agrees that the applicant will utilize existing 
        resources to the maximum extent practicable.
    (e) Application for Awards of Assistance.--The Secretary may make 
an award of a grant or contract under subsection (a) only if an 
application for the award is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this subpart, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this subpart.

SEC. 3462. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Enabling Services.--For the purpose of carrying out section 
3461(b), there are authorized to be appropriated $17,200,000 for fiscal 
year 1996, $68,900,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, 
$68,900,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
years 2001 through 2004.
    (b) Supplemental Services.--For the purpose of carrying out section 
3461(c), there are authorized to be appropriated $82,000,000 for fiscal 
year 1996, $123,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, 
$205,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the 
fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (c) Federally Qualified Health Centers and Rural Health Clinics.--
With respect to federally qualified health centers (as defined in 
section 1861(aa)(4) of the Social Security Act) and rural health 
clinics--
            (1) for the purpose of carrying out section 3461(b), there 
        are authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 for fiscal year 
        1996, $161,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 
        1999, $201,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for 
        each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004; and
            (2) for the purpose of carrying out section 3461(c), there 
        are authorized to be appropriated $24,600,000 for fiscal year 
        1996, $36,900,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 
        1999, $61,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each 
        of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004; and
    (d) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.

                 PART 2--NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS

SEC. 3471. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Additional Funding; General Corps Program; Allocations 
Regarding Nurses.--For the purpose of carrying out subpart II of part D 
of title III of the Public Health Service Act, and for the purpose of 
carrying out section 3472, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$123,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997, and 
$201,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000, and 
$2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.

SEC. 3472. ALLOCATION FOR PARTICIPATION OF NURSES IN SCHOLARSHIP AND 
              LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.

    Of the amounts appropriated under section 3471, the Secretary shall 
reserve such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that, of the 
aggregate number of individuals who are participants in the Scholarship 
Program under section 338A of the Public Health Service Act, or in the 
Loan Repayment Program under section 338B of such Act, the total number 
who are being educated as nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, or nurse 
anesthetists or are serving as nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, or 
nurse anesthetists, respectively, is increased to 20 percent.

SEC. 3473. ALLOCATION FOR PARTICIPATION OF PSYCHIATRISTS, 
              PSYCHOLOGISTS, AND CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKERS IN SCHOLARSHIP 
              AND LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.

    Of the amounts appropriate under section 3471, the Secretary shall 
reserve such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that of the 
aggregate number of individuals who are participants in the scholarship 
program under section 338A of the Public Health Service Act, the number 
who are being educated as psychiatrists, psychologists, and clinical 
social workers or are serving as psychiatrists, psychologists, and 
clinical social workers, respectively, is increased to 15 percent.

      PART 3--PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS SERVING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS

SEC. 3481. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS.

    (a) Entitlement Status.--The Secretary shall make payments in 
accordance with this part to eligible hospitals described in section 
3482. The preceding sentence--
            (1) is an entitlement in the Secretary on behalf of such 
        eligible hospitals (but is not an entitlement in the State in 
        which any such hospital is located or in any individual 
        receiving services from any such hospital); and
            (2) constitutes budget authority in advance of 
        appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the 
        Federal Government to provide funding for such payments in the 
        amounts, and for the fiscal years, specified in subsection (b).
    (b) Appropriations.--
            (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the 
        amounts and fiscal years specified in this subsection are (in 
        the aggregate for all eligible hospitals) $1,300,000,000 for 
        the fiscal year in which the general effective date occurs and 
        for each subsequent fiscal year.
            (2) Special rule for years before general effective date.--
                    (A) In general.--For each of the fiscal years 1996 
                and 1997, the amount specified in this subsection for 
                purposes of subsection (a)(2) shall be equal to the 
                aggregate DSH percentage of the amount otherwise 
                determined under paragraph (1).
                    (B) Aggregate dsh percentage defined.--In 
                subparagraph (A), the ``aggregate DSH percentage'' for 
                a year is the amount (expressed as a percentage) equal 
                to--
                            (i) the total amount of payment made by the 
                        Secretary under section 1903(a) of the Social 
                        Security Act during the base year with respect 
                        to payment adjustments made under section 
                        1923(c) of such Act for hospitals in the States 
                        in which eligible hospitals for the year are 
                        located; divided by
                            (ii) the total amount of payment made by 
                        the Secretary under section 1903(a) of such Act 
                        during the base year with respect to payment 
                        adjustments made under section 1923(c) of such 
                        Act for hospitals in all States.
    (c) Payments Made on Quarterly Basis.--Payments to an eligible 
hospital under this section for a year shall be made on a quarterly 
basis during the year.

SEC. 3482. IDENTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOSPITALS.

    (a) State Identification.--In accordance with the criteria 
described in subsection (b) and such procedures as the Secretary may 
require, each State shall identify the hospitals in the State that meet 
such criteria and provide the Secretary with a list of such hospitals.
    (b) Criteria for Eligibility.--A hospital meets the criteria 
described in this subsection if the hospital's low-income utilization 
rate for the base year under section 1923(b)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (as such section is in effect on the day before the date of the 
enactment of this Act) is not less than 25 percent.

SEC. 3483. AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS.

    (a) Distribution of Allocation for Low-Income Assistance.--
            (1) Allocation from total amount.--Of the total amount 
        available for payments under this section in a year, 66.66 
        percent shall be allocated to hospitals for low-income 
        assistance in accordance with this subsection.
            (2) Determination of hospital payment amount.--The amount 
        of payment to an eligible hospital from the allocation made 
        under paragraph (1) during a year shall be the equal to the 
        hospital's low-income percentage of the allocation for the 
        year.
    (b) Distribution of Allocation for Assistance for Uncovered 
Services.--
            (1) Allocation from total amount; determination of state-
        specific portion of allocation.--Of the total amount available 
        for payments under this section in a year, 33.33 percent shall 
        be allocated to hospitals for assistance in furnishing hospital 
        services that are not covered services under title I (in 
        accordance with regulations of the Secretary) or in furnishing 
        hospital services to individuals, including those residing in 
        Southwestern border States, who are not eligible individuals 
        under title I, in accordance with this subsection. The amount 
        available for payments to eligible hospitals in a State shall 
        be equal to an amount determined in accordance with a 
        methodology specified by the Secretary that shall take into 
        consideration the volume of such services provided by hospital 
        in the State as compared to the volume of such services 
        provided by all eligible hospitals.
            (2) Determination of hospital payment amount.--The amount 
        of payment to an eligible hospital in a State from the amount 
        available for payments to eligible hospitals in the State under 
        paragraph (1) during a year shall be the equal to the 
        hospital's low-income percentage of such amount for the year.
    (c) Low-Income Percentage Defined.--
            (1) In general.--In this subsection, an eligible hospital's 
        ``low-income percentage'' for a year is equal to the amount 
        (expressed as a percentage) of the total low-income days for 
        all eligible hospitals for the year that are attributable to 
        the hospital.
            (2) Low-income days described.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), an eligible hospital's low-income days for a year shall be 
        equal to the product of--
                    (A) the total number of inpatient days for the 
                hospital for the year (as reported to the Secretary by 
                the State in which the hospital is located, in 
                accordance with a reporting schedule and procedures 
                established by the Secretary); and
                    (B) the hospital's low-income utilization rate for 
                the base year under section 1923(b)(3) of the Social 
                Security Act (as such section is in effect on the day 
                before the date of the enactment of this Act).

SEC. 3484. BASE YEAR.

    In this part, the ``base year'' is, with respect to a State and 
hospitals in a State, the year immediately prior to the year in which 
the general effective date occurs.

               Subtitle F--Mental Health; Substance Abuse

           PART 1--AUTHORITIES REGARDING PARTICIPATING STATES

SEC. 3510. INTEGRATION OF MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SYSTEMS.

    (a) In General.--As a condition of being a participating State 
under title I, each State shall, not later than January 1, 2001, 
achieve the integration of the mental illness and substance abuse 
services of the State and its political subdivisions with the mental 
illness and substance abuse services offered by health plans pursuant 
to title I of this Act. A State may petition the Secretary for a waiver 
of the requirement of this subsection under the circumstances described 
in section 3511(b)(7).
    (b) Certification of Readiness.--
            (1) Petition.--A State may petition the Secretary to 
        integrate the mental illness and substance abuse services of 
        the State and its political subdivisions with the mental 
        illness and substance abuse services offered by health plans 
        pursuant to title I of this Act prior to January 1, 2001.
            (2) State readiness to integrate.--Upon receiving such a 
        petition, the Secretary shall, based on the reports submitted 
        pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of section 3511 and the 
        criteria promulgated pursuant to paragraph (3), ascertain the 
        State's readiness to integrate its mental illness and substance 
        abuse services with the mental illness and substance abuse 
        services offered by health plans pursuant to title I of this 
        Act and certify whether the State is prepared to conduct such 
        an integration.
            (3) Criteria.--The certification by the Secretary of a 
        State's readiness to integrate under paragraph (2) shall be 
        based on objective criteria promulgated by the Secretary after 
        consultation with the States.
    (c) Application of Provisions.--Upon the issuance of a 
certification of readiness by the Secretary for a State, the limits set 
forth in subsections (d)(2)(B) and (e)(2)(A) of section 1106 shall not 
apply to the provision of mental illness and substance abuse services 
in the State.

SEC. 3511. REPORT ON INTEGRATION OF MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEMS.

    (a) In General.--As a condition of being a participating State 
under title I, each State shall, not later than October 1, 1998, submit 
to the Secretary a report containing the information described in 
subsection (b) on (including a plan for) the measures to be implemented 
by the State to achieve the integration of the mental illness and 
substance abuse services of the State and its political subdivisions 
with the mental illness and substance abuse services that are included 
in the comprehensive benefit package under title I. The plan required 
in the preceding sentence shall meet the conditions described in 
section 3083(b). In addition, each State shall submit to the Secretary 
a report containing the information described in subsection (c) for 
each year in which the State participates under title I up to and 
including the year 2001 or the date on which an unlimited benefit for 
mental illness and substance abuse services is provided, whichever 
occurs later.
    (b) Required Contents of Integration Report.--With respect to the 
provision of items and services relating to mental illness and 
substance abuse, the report of a State under subsection (a) shall, at a 
minimum, contain the following information:
            (1) Information on the number of individuals served by or 
        through mental illness and substance abuse programs 
        administered by State and local agencies and the proportion who 
        are eligible persons under title I.
            (2) Information on the extent to which each health provider 
        furnishing mental illness and substance abuse services under a 
        State program participates or will participate in one or more 
        regional or corporate alliance health plans, and, in the case 
        of providers that do not so participate, the reasons for the 
        lack of participation.
            (3) With respect to the two years preceding the year in 
        which the State becomes a participating State under title I--
                    (A) the amount of funds expended by the State and 
                its political subdivisions for each of such years for 
                items and services that are included in the 
                comprehensive benefit package under such title;
                    (B) the amount of funds expended for medically 
                necessary and appropriate items and services not 
                included in such benefit package, including medical 
                care, other health care, and supportive services 
                related to the provision of health care.
            (4) An estimate of the amount that the State will expend to 
        furnish items and services not included in such package once 
        the expansion of coverage for mental illness and substance 
        abuse services is implemented in the year 2001.
            (5) A description of how the State will assure that all 
        individuals served by mental illness and substance abuse 
        programs funded by the State will be enrolled in a health plan 
        and how mental illness and substance abuse services not covered 
        under the benefit package will continue to be furnished to such 
        enrollees.
            (6) A description of the conditions under which the 
        integration of mental illness and substance abuse providers 
        into regional and corporate alliances can be achieved, and an 
        identification of changes in participation and certification 
        requirements that are needed to achieve the integration of such 
        programs and providers into health plans.
            (7) If the integration of mental illness and substance 
        abuse programs operated by the State into one or more health 
        plans is not medically appropriate or feasible for one or more 
        groups of individuals treated under State programs, a 
        description of the reasons that integration is not feasible or 
        appropriate and a plan for assuring the coordination for such 
        individuals of the care and services covered under the 
        comprehensive benefit package with the additional items and 
        services furnished by such programs.
            (8) A description of the manner in which the resources that 
        the State and its political subdivisions currently spend on 
        mental health and substance abuse services will be used to 
        facilitate integration.
    (c) Required Contents of Transition Report.--With respect to the a 
report required under this subsection, the report shall, at a minimum, 
contain the following information:
            (1) The amount of funds expended for substance abuse and 
        mental health services by the source of revenue, including, 
        Federal block grant funds, under title XIX of the Public Health 
        Service Act, Federal categorical grant funds, State and local 
        revenues and health plan payments.
            (2) The amount of funds expended for supportive services to 
        individuals enrolled in substance abuse and mental health 
        treatment programs, including transportation, child care, 
        educational and vocational training and coordination with other 
        public systems such as the social service, child welfare and 
        juvenile and criminal justice systems, by source of revenue.
            (3) The amount of funds expended on medically necessary and 
        appropriate items and services not covered or reimbursed in the 
        comprehensive benefit package by source of revenue.
            (4) The amount of funds expended by the State on substance 
        abuse and mental illness services for individuals who are not 
        eligible to receive the comprehensive benefit package pursuant 
        to this Act, and the source of revenue for such services.
    (d) General Provisions.--Reports under subsections (b) and (c) 
shall be provided at the time and in the manner prescribed by the 
Secretary. The Secretary shall also determine what, if any, reports 
shall be submitted in years following the implementation of an 
unlimited benefit for mental illness and substance abuse services.
    (e) Reporting Requirement.--Each State shall report annually to the 
Secretary on the incidence and prevalence of mental illness and 
substance abuse disorders in the prison population, changes in such 
incidence and prevalence in the prison population, and potential 
causative factors with respect to such changes, including an estimate 
of the extent to which the denial of treatment, or the provision of 
inadequate treatment, to individuals with mental illness and substance 
abuse disorders is contributing to the criminal activity of such 
individuals.

PART 2--ASSISTANCE FOR STATE MANAGED MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE 
                                PROGRAMS

SEC. 3531. AVAILABILITY OF ASSISTANCE.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to States for the 
development and operation of comprehensive managed mental health and 
substance abuse programs that are integrated with the health delivery 
system established under this Act. Such programs shall--
            (1) promote the development of integrated delivery systems 
        for the management of the mental health and substance abuse 
        services provided under the comprehensive benefits package;
            (2) give priority to providing services to low-income 
        adults with serious mental illness or substance abuse disorders 
        and children with serious emotional disturbance or substance 
        abuse disorders and provide for the phase-in of such services 
        for all eligible persons within 5 years;
            (3) ensure that individuals participating in the program 
        have access to all medically necessary mental health and 
        substance abuse services;
            (4) promote the linkage of mental health and substance 
        abuse services with primary and preventive health care 
        services; and
            (5) meet such other requirements as the Secretary may 
        impose.
    (b) Exception.--Nothing in this part shall be construed as 
preventing States that have separate administrative entities for mental 
health and for substance abuse services from establishing separate 
comprehensive managed care programs for such services and receiving 
assistance under this part for either or both programs.

SEC. 3532. PLAN REQUIREMENTS.

    In order to receive a grant under this part, a State must have a 
plan for a comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
program which is approved by the Secretary. Such plan shall--
            (1) describe the management, access, and referral structure 
        that the State will use to promote and achieve integration of 
        mental health and substance abuse services with the health 
        delivery system established under this Act for eligible 
        individuals in the State;
            (2) describe how the State will ensure that providers of 
        specialized services will meet appropriate standards and 
        provide assurances that the State has complied with section 
        1504 as it affects mental health and substance abuse services;
            (3) describe payment, utilization review, and other 
        mechanisms that the State will use to encourage appropriate 
        service delivery and management of costs;
            (4) describe uniform patient placement criteria that the 
        State will use to ensure placement in appropriate substance 
        abuse treatment programs;
            (5) describe the processes the State will use to ensure 
        that individuals will continue to have access to treatment 
        through referrals from nonhealth public entities, such the 
        juvenile or criminal justice systems, or social service 
        systems;
            (6) specify the methods the State will use to ensure that 
        individuals receiving services under the program have access to 
        all medically necessary and appropriate mental health and 
        substance abuse services;
            (7) define terms that will be used by the State in 
        determining the eligibility of individuals for services under 
        the program;
            (8) describe how health plans will use services under the 
        comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
        programs established under this part;
            (9) describe the role of local government in financing and 
        managing the integrated mental illness and substance abuse 
        treatment system;
            (10) describe the sources of funding, including Medicaid 
        and the block grants authorized by title XIX of the Public 
        Health Service Act, that will be used by the State, other than 
        the grant received under this part, to operate the program, and 
        provide the status of any request for a Medicaid waiver made by 
        the State to the Secretary;
            (11) describe how the State provided for broad-based public 
        input in the development of the plan, and the mechanism that 
        will be used for ongoing public comment on and review of 
        amendments to the plan; and
            (12) describe grievance procedures that will be available 
        for individuals dissatisfied with their health plan's 
        participation in the comprehensive managed mental health and 
        substance abuse program, and mechanisms that will be available 
        to review the performance of health plans and fee-for-service 
        arrangements to ensure against under treatment.

SEC. 3533. ADDITIONAL FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITIES.

    The Secretary shall, upon the submission of a State's plan under 
section 3532, ensure the timely consideration of any Medicaid waiver 
requests submitted by the State, affirm that section 1504 has been 
implemented, and ensure the timely implementation of section 
1641(b)(5).

SEC. 3534. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this part, 
$82,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000, and 
$2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.

   Subtitle G--Comprehensive School Health Education; School-Related 
                            Health Services

   PART 1--HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS GRANTS FOR SCHOOL HEALTH 
                               EDUCATION

SEC. 3601. PURPOSES.

    It is the purpose of this part--
            (1) to support the development and implementation of 
        comprehensive age appropriate health education programs in 
        public schools for children and youth kindergarten through 
        grade 12; and
            (2) to increase access to preventive and primary health 
        care services for children and youth through school-based or 
        school-linked health service sites in accordance with locally 
        determined needs.

SEC. 3602. HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS GRANTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Education, shall award grants to State educational agencies in 
eligible States to integrate comprehensive school health education in 
schools within the State, with priority given within States to those 
communities in greatest need as defined by section 3683(a).
    (b) Eligible Uses of Funds.--Funds made available under this 
section shall be used--
            (1) to implement comprehensive school health education 
        programs, as defined in subsection (f)(1) through grants to 
        local educational agencies;
            (2) to provide staff development and technical assistance 
        to local educational agencies, schools, local health agencies, 
        and other community organizations involved in providing 
        comprehensive school health education programs;
            (3) to evaluate and report to the Secretary on the progress 
        made towards attaining the goals and objectives described under 
        subsection (c)(1)(A); and
            (4) to conduct such other activities to achieve the 
        objectives of this subpart as the Secretary may require.
    (c) Application.--An application for a grant under subsection (a), 
shall be jointly developed by the State educational agency and the 
State health agencies of the State involved, and shall contain--
            (1) a State plan for comprehensive school health education 
        programs, that outlines--
                    (A) the goals and objectives of the State for 
                school health education programs, and the manner in 
                which the State will allocate funds to local 
                educational agencies in order to achieve these goals 
                and objectives;
                    (B) the manner in which the State will coordinate 
                programs under this part with other Federal, State and 
                local health education programs and resources, and 
                school health services;
                    (C) the manner in which comprehensive school health 
                education programs will be coordinated with other 
                Federal, State and local education programs (such as 
                programs under titles I, II, and IV of the Elementary 
                and Secondary Education Act of 1965), with the school 
                improvement plan of the State, if any, under title III 
                of the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, and with any 
                similar programs;
                    (D) the manner in which the State shall work with 
                State and local educational agencies and with State and 
                local health agencies to reduce barriers to 
                implementing school health education programs;
                    (E) the manner in which the State will monitor the 
                implementation of such programs by local educational 
                agencies and establish outcome criteria by which to 
                evaluate their effectiveness in achieving progress 
                towards the goals and objectives described in 
                subparagraph (A);
                    (F) the manner in which the State will provide 
                staff development and technical assistance to local 
                educational agencies, and build capacity for 
                professional development of health educators; and
                    (G) the manner in which such school health 
                education programs will be, to the extent practicable, 
                culturally competent and linguistically appropriate and 
                responsive to the diverse needs of the students served;
            (2) a description of the respective roles of the State 
        educational agency, local educational agencies, the State 
        health agency and local health agencies in developing and 
        implementing the State's school health education plan and 
        resulting programs;
            (3) a description of the input of the local community 
        (including students and parents) in the development and 
        operation of comprehensive school health education programs;
            (4) an assurance that communities identified in section 
        3683(a) receive priority as locations for comprehensive school 
        health education programs for all grades to the extent that a 
        State does not implement a statewide program; and
            (5) an assurance that grants to local educational agencies 
        under subsection (b)(1) are contingent upon submission by such 
        agencies of a plan consistent with the requirements for the 
        State plan as required under this subsection.
    (d) Waivers of Statutory and Regulatory Requirements.--
            (1) Waivers.-- Except as provided in paragraph (4), upon 
        the request of an entity and under a relevant program described 
        in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        and the Secretary of Education may grant to the entity a waiver 
        of any requirement of such program regarding the use of funds, 
        or of the regulations issued for the program by the Secretary 
        involved, if the following conditions are met with respect to 
        such program:
                    (A) The Secretary involved determines that the 
                requirements of such program impede the ability of the 
                State educational agency to achieve more effectively 
                the purposes described in section 3601.
                    (B) The Secretary involved determines that, with 
                respect to the use of funds under such program, the 
                requested use of the funds by the entity would be 
                consistent with the purposes described in section 3601.
                    (C) The State educational agency provides all 
                interested local educational agencies in the State with 
                notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposal 
                and makes these comments available to the Secretary.
            (2) Relevant programs.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
        programs described in this subparagraph are the following:
                    (A) In the case of programs administered by the 
                Secretary of Health and Human Services, the following:
                            (i) The program known as the Prevention, 
                        Treatment, and Rehabilitation Model Projects 
                        for High Risk Youth, carried out under section 
                        517 of the Public Health Service Act.
                            (ii) The program known as the State and 
                        Local Comprehensive School Health Programs to 
                        Prevent Important Health Problems and Improve 
                        Educational Outcomes, carried out under such 
                        Act.
                    (B) In the case of programs administered by the 
                Secretary of Education, any program carried out under 
                part B of the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 
                1986, except that a component of such comprehensive 
                school health education must be consistent with the 
                statutory intent and purposes of such Act.
            (3) Waiver period.--A waiver under this paragraph shall be 
        for a period not to exceed 3 years, unless the Secretary 
        involved determines that--
                    (A) the waiver has been effective in enabling the 
                State to carry out the activities for which it was 
                requested and has contributed to improved performance 
                of comprehensive health education programs; and
                    (B) such extension is in the public interest;
            (4) Waivers not authorized.--The Secretary involved under 
        paragraph (1), may not waive, under this section, any statutory 
        or regulatory requirements relating to--
                    (A) comparability of services;
                    (B) maintenance of effort;
                    (C) parental participation and involvement;
                    (D) the distribution of funds to States or to local 
                educational agencies or other recipients of funds under 
                the programs described in paragraph (2);
                    (E) maintenance of records;
                    (F) applicable civil rights requirements; or
                    (G) the requirements of sections 438 and 439 of the 
                General Education Provisions Act.
            (5) Termination of waiver.--The Secretary involved under 
        paragraph (1) shall terminate a waiver under this subsection if 
        the Secretary determines that the performance of the State 
        affected by the waiver has been inadequate to justify a 
        continuation of the waiver or if it is no longer necessary to 
        achieve its original purpose.
    (e) Definitions.--As used in this section:
            (1) Comprehensive school health education.--The term 
        ``comprehensive school health education'' means a planned, 
        sequential program of health education that addresses the 
        physical, emotional and social dimensions of student health in 
        kindergarten through grade 12. Such program shall--
                    (A) be designed to assist students in developing 
                the knowledge and behavioral skills needed to make 
                positive health choices and maintain and improve their 
                health, prevent disease and injuries, and reduce risk 
                behaviors which adversely impact health;
                    (B) be comprehensive and include a variety of 
                components addressing personal health, community and 
                environmental health, injury prevention and safety, 
                nutritional health, the effects of substance use and 
                abuse, consumer health regarding the benefits and 
                appropriate use of medical services including 
                immunizations and other clinical preventive services, 
                and other components deemed appropriate by the local 
                educational agencies;
                    (C) be designed to be linguistically and culturally 
                competent and responsive to the needs of the students 
                served; and
                    (D) address locally relevant priorities as 
                determined by parents, students, teachers, and school 
                administrators and health officials.
            (2) Eligible state.--The term ``eligible State'' means a 
        State with a memorandum of understanding or a written 
        cooperative agreement entered into by the agencies responsible 
        for health and education concerning the planning and 
        implementation of comprehensive school health education 
        programs. Among these States a priority shall be given to 
        qualified States as defined in section 3682(c).
            (3) State educational agency.--The term ``State educational 
        agency'' means the officer or agency primarily responsible for 
        the State supervision of public elementary and secondary 
        schools.
            (4) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational 
        agency'' means a public board of education or other public 
        authority legally constituted within a State for either 
        administrative control or direction of, or to perform a service 
        function for, public elementary or secondary schools in a city, 
        county, township, school district, or other political 
        subdivision of a State, or such combination of school districts 
        or counties as are recognized in a State as an administrative 
        agency for its public elementary or secondary schools. Such 
        term includes any other public institution or agency having 
        administrative control and direction of a public elementary or 
        secondary school.
    (f) Authorized Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
section, out of the funds available under section 3695(b)(2), there are 
made available, not to exceed $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
$20,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and 
$50,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.

SEC. 3603. HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE.

    (a) Establishment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a Healthy 
Students-Healthy Schools Interagency Task Force to be composed of 
representatives of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, the Office of School Health Education within the 
Department of Education, and other Federal agencies and departments 
which have responsibility for components of school health and 
education.
    (b) Co-chairpersons.--The Assistant Secretary for Health and the 
Assistant Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education shall serve 
as co-chairpersons of the task force established under subsection (a).
    (c) Functions and Activities.--The task force established under 
subsection (a) shall--
            (1) review and coordinate all Federal efforts in school 
        health education and health services;
            (2) provide scientific and technical advice concerning the 
        development and implementation of model comprehensive school 
        health education programs and curricula;
            (3) develop model student learning objectives and 
        assessment instruments that shall be made available to all 
        States;
            (4) develop a uniform grant application form (a form that 
        serves as the principal document containing the core 
        information concerning a particular entity) and procedures that 
        may be used with respect to all school health education-related 
        programs (including supplementary information procedures to be 
        implemented when an entity that has already submitted an 
        application form is applying for additional assistance) that 
        require the submission of an application; and
            (5) recommend to the Secretary, for inclusion in the 
        biennial report required by section 3604(2), methods for 
        effectively linking school health education and health services 
        research findings at the Federal level with implementation at 
        the State and local levels.
    (d) Consolidation of Initiatives.--Not later than 12 months after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the task force established under 
subsection (a) shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report 
containing the recommendations of the task force for the consolidation 
of Federal school health education initiatives.

SEC. 3604. DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.

    The Secretary shall--
            (1) establish and maintain a national clearinghouse, using 
        advanced technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and 
        mechanisms for the diverse dissemination of school health 
        education material, including written, audio-visual, and 
        electronically conveyed information to educators, schools, 
        health care providers, and other individuals, organizations, 
        and governmental entities;
            (2) submit a biennial report to the Committee on Labor and 
        Human Resources of the Senate and the appropriate committees of 
        the House of Representatives on the implementation and 
        contribution of comprehensive school health education programs 
        funded under this part toward achieving relevant National 
        Healthy People 2000 objectives established by the Secretary; 
        and
            (3) encourage coordination among Federal agencies, State 
        and local governments, educators, school health providers, 
        community-based organizations, and private sector entities to 
        support development of comprehensive school health education 
        programs and school health services.

                 PART 5--SCHOOL-RELATED HEALTH SERVICES

                  Subpart A--Development and Operation

SEC. 3681. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Funding for School-Related Health Services.--For the purpose of 
carrying out this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$82,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $164,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
$266,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $369,000,000 for fiscal year 
1998, $471,500,000 for fiscal year 1999, $574,000,000 for fiscal year 
2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (b) Funding for Planning and Development Grants.--Of amounts made 
available under this section, not to exceed $10,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 1995 and 1996 may be utilized to carry out section 3684.

SEC. 3682. ELIGIBILITY FOR GRANTS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Planning and development grants.--Entities eligible to 
        apply for and receive grants under section 3684 are--
                    (A) State health agencies that apply on behalf of 
                local community partnerships; or
                    (B) local community partnerships in States in which 
                health agencies have not successfully applied.
            (2) Operational grants.--Entities eligible to apply for and 
        receive grants under section 3685 are--
                    (A) a qualified State as designated under 
                subsection (c) that apply on behalf of local community 
                partnerships; or
                    (B) local community partnerships in States that are 
                not designated under subparagraph (A).
    (b) Local Community Partnerships.--
            (1) In general.--A local community partnership under 
        subsection (a)(1)(B) and (a)(2)(B) is an entity that, at a 
        minimum includes--
                    (A) a local health care provider, which may be a 
                local public health department, with experience in 
                delivering services to children and youth or medically 
                underserved populations;
                    (B) local educational agency on behalf of one or 
                more public schools; and
                    (C) one community based organization located in the 
                community to be served that has a history of providing 
                services to at-risk children and youth.
            (2) Rural communities.--In rural communities, local 
        partnerships should seek to include, to the fullest extent 
        practicable, providers and community based organizations with 
        experience in serving the target population.
            (3) Parent and community participation.--An applicant 
        described in subsection (a) shall, to the maximum extent 
        feasible, involve broad-based community participation 
        (including parents of the youth to be served).
    (c) Qualified State.--A qualified State under subsection (a)(2)(A) 
is a State that, at a minimum--
            (1) demonstrates an organizational commitment (including a 
        strategic plan) to providing a broad range of health, health 
        education and support services to at-risk youth; and
            (2) has a memorandum of understanding or cooperative 
        agreement jointly entered into by the State agencies 
        responsible for health and education regarding the planned 
        delivery of health and support services in school-based or 
        school-linked centers.

SEC. 3683. PREFERENCES.

    In making grants under sections 3684 and 3685, the Secretary shall 
give priority to applicants whose-communities to be served show the 
most substantial level of need for health services among children and 
youth.

SEC. 3684. PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants during fiscal years 
1995 and 1996 to entities eligible under section 3862 to develop 
school-based or school-linked health service sites.
    (b) Use of Funds.--Amounts provided under a grant under this 
section may be used for the following:
            (1) Planning for the provision of school health services, 
        including--
                    (A) an assessment of the need for health services 
                among youth in the communities to be served;
                    (B) the health services to be provided and how new 
                services will be integrated with existing services;
                    (C) assessing and planning for the modernization 
                and expansion of existing facilities and equipment to 
                accommodate such services; and
                    (D) an affiliation with relevant health plans.
            (2) recruitment and training of staff for the 
        administration and delivery of school health services;
            (3) the establishment of local community partnerships as 
        described in section 3682 (b);
            (4) in the case of States, the development of memorandums 
        of understanding or cooperative agreements for the coordinated 
        delivery of health and support services through school health 
        service sites; and
            (5) other activities necessary to assume operational 
        status.
    (c) Application for Grants.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this section an entity described in section 3682 (a) shall submit 
an application in a form and manner prescribed by the Secretary.
    (d) Number of Grants.--Not more than one planning grant may be made 
to a single applicant. A planning grant may not exceed 2 years in 
duration.
    (e) Amount Available for Development Grant.--The Secretary may 
award not to exceed--
            (1) $150,000 to entities under section 3682(a)(1)(A) and to 
        localities planning for a citywide or countywide school health 
        services delivery system; and
            (2) $50,000 to entities under section 3682(a)(1)(B).

SEC. 3685. GRANTS FOR OPERATION OF SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to eligible entities 
described in section 3682(a)(2) that submit applications consistent 
with the requirements of this section, to pay the cost of operating 
school-based or school-linked health service sites.
    (b) Use of Grant.--Amounts provided under a grant under this 
section may be used for the following--
            (1) health services, including diagnosis and treatment of 
        simple illnesses and minor injuries;
            (2) preventive health services, including health screenings 
        follow-up health care, mental health, and preventive health 
        education;
            (3) enabling services, as defined in section 3461(b), and 
        other necessary support services;
            (4) training, recruitment, and compensation of health 
        professionals and other staff necessary for the administration 
        and delivery of school health services; and
            (5) referral services, including the linkage of individuals 
        to health plans, and community-based health and social service 
        providers.
    (c) Application for Grant.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section an entity described in section 3682(a)(2) shall submit an 
application in a form and manner prescribed by the Secretary. In order 
to receive a grant under this section, an applicant must include in the 
application the following information--
            (1) a description of the services to be furnished by the 
        applicant;
            (2) the amounts and sources of funding that the applicant 
        will expend, including estimates of the amount of payments the 
        applicant will receive from health plans and other sources;
            (3) a description of local community partnerships, 
        including parent and community participation;
            (4) a description of the linkages with other health and 
        social service providers; and
            (5) such other information as the Secretary determines to 
        be appropriate.
    (d) Assurances.--In order to receive a grant under this section, an 
applicant must meet the following conditions--
            (1) school health service sites will, directly or 
        indirectly, provide a broad range of health services, in 
        accordance with the determinations of the local community 
        partnership, that may include--
                    (A) diagnosis and treatment of simple illnesses and 
                minor injuries;
                    (B) preventive health services, including health 
                screenings and follow-up health care, mental health and 
                preventive health education;
                    (C) enabling services, as defined in section 
                3461(b);
                    (D) referrals (including referrals regarding mental 
                health and substance abuse) with follow-up to ensure 
                that needed services are received;
            (2) the applicant provides services recommended by the 
        health provider, in consultation with the local community 
        partnership, and with the approval of the local education 
        agency;
            (3) the applicant provides the services under this 
        subsection to adolescents, and other school age children and 
        their families as deemed appropriate by the local partnership;
            (4) the applicant maintains agreements with community-based 
        health care providers with a history of providing services to 
        such populations for the provision of health care services not 
        otherwise provided directly or during the hours when school 
        health services are unavailable;
            (5) the applicant establishes an affiliation with relevant 
        health plans and will establish reimbursement procedures and 
        will make every reasonable effort to collect appropriate 
        reimbursement for services provided; and
            (6) the applicant agrees to supplement and not supplant the 
        level of State or local funds under the direct control of the 
        applying State or participating local education or health 
        authority expended for school health services as defined by 
        this Act;
            (7) services funded under this Act will be coordinated with 
        existing school health services provided at a participating 
        school; and
            (8) for applicants in rural areas, the assurances required 
        under paragraph (4) shall be fulfilled to the maximum extent 
        possible.
    (e) State Laws.--Notwithstanding any other provision in this part, 
no school based health clinic may provide services, to any minor, when 
to do so is a violation of State laws or regulations pertaining to 
informed consent for medical services to minors.
    (f) Limitation on Administrative Funds.--In the case of a State 
applying on behalf of local educational partnerships, the applicant may 
retain not more than 5 percent of grants awarded under this subpart for 
administrative costs.
    (g) Duration of Grant.--A grant under this section shall be for a 
period determined appropriate by the Secretary.
    (h) Amount of Grant.--The annual amount of a grant awarded under 
this section shall not be more than $200,000 per school-based or 
school-linked health service site.
    (i) Federal Share.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), a grant for 
        services awarded under this section may not exceed--
                    (A) 90 percent of the non-reimbursed cost of the 
                activities to be funded under the program for the first 
                2 fiscal years for which the program receives 
                assistance under this section; and
                    (B) 75 percent of the non-reimbursed cost of such 
                activities for subsequent years for which the program 
                receives assistance under this section.
        The remainder of such costs shall be made available as provided 
        in paragraph (2).
            (2) Form of non-federal share.--The non-Federal share 
        required by paragraph (1) may be in cash or in-kind, fairly 
        evaluated, including facilities, equipment, personnel, or 
        services, but may not include amounts provided by the Federal 
        Government. In-kind contributions may include space within a 
        school facilities, school personnel, program use of school 
        transportation systems, outposted health personnel, and 
        extension of health provider medical liability insurance.
            (3) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirements of 
        paragraph (1) for any year in accordance with criteria 
        established by regulation. Such criteria shall include a 
        documented need for the services provided under this section 
        and an inability of the grantee to meet the requirements of 
        paragraph (1) despite a good faith effort.
    (j) Training and Technical Assistance.--Entities that receive 
assistance under this section may use not to exceed 10 percent of the 
amount of such assistance to provide staff training and to secure 
necessary technical assistance. To the maximum extent feasible, 
technical assistance should be sought through local community-based 
entities. The limitation contained in this subsection shall apply to 
individuals employed to assist in obtaining funds under this part. 
Staff training should include the training of teachers and other school 
personnel necessary to ensure appropriate referral and utilization of 
services, and appropriate linkages between class-room activities and 
services offered.
    (k) Report and Monitoring.--The Secretary will submit to the 
Committee on Labor and Human Resources in the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce in the House of Representatives a biennial 
report on the activities funded under this Act, consistent with the 
ongoing monitoring activities of the Department. Such reports are 
intended to advise the relevant Committees of the availability and 
utilization of services, and other relevant information about program 
activities.

            Subpart B--Capital Costs of Developing Projects

SEC. 3691. FUNDING.

    Amounts available to the Secretary under section 3412 for the 
purpose of carrying out subparts B and C of part 2 of subtitle E are, 
in addition to such purpose, available to the Secretary for the purpose 
of carrying out this subpart.

              Subtitle H--Public Health Service Initiative

SEC. 3695. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE INITIATIVE.

    (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall pay, from funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, individuals and entities that are eligible to receive 
assistance pursuant to the provisions referred to in paragraphs (1) 
through (13) of subsection (b), to the extent of the amounts specified 
under subsection (b).
    (b) Amounts Specified.--The amounts specified in subsection (a) 
with respect to a fiscal year shall be--
            (1) with respect to the core functions of public health 
        programs authorized under part 2 of subtitle D of title III, 
        $123,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $184,500,000 for fiscal year 
        1996, $266,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, $348,500,000 for 
        fiscal year 1998, $410,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, 
        $512,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of 
        the fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (2) with respect to the national initiatives regarding 
        health promotion and disease prevention under part 3 of 
        subtitle D of title III, $102,500,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 1996 through 1998, $123,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 1999 and 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 2001 through 2004;
            (3) with respect to occupational injury and illness 
        prevention under section 3903, $92,250,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 1995 through 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (4) with respect to activities for the development of plans 
        and networks under subpart B of part 2 of subtitle E of title 
        III--
                    (A) $43,050,000 for fiscal year 1995, $100,450,000 
                for fiscal year 1996, $157,850,000 for fiscal year 
                1997, $129,150,000 for fiscal year 1998, $100,450,000 
                for fiscal year 1999, $43,050,000 for fiscal year 2000, 
                and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 
                through 2004; and
                    (B) with respect to awards to federally qualified 
                health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
                the Social Security Act) and rural health clinics under 
                such subpart, $79,950,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
                $186,550,000 for fiscal year 1996, $293,150,000 for 
                fiscal year 1997, $239,850,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
                $186,550,000 for fiscal year 1999, $79,950,000 for 
                fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
                years 2001 through 2004;
            (5) with respect to capital costs under subpart C of part 2 
        of subtitle E of title III, $41,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 1995 through 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 2001 through 2004;
            (6) with respect to enabling services under subpart D of 
        part 2 of subtitle E of title III--
                    (A) $17,200,000 for fiscal year 1996, $68,900,000 
                for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, 
                $68,900,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for 
                each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004; and
                    (B) with respect to awards to federally qualified 
                health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
                the Social Security Act) and rural health clinics under 
                such subpart, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
                $161,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 
                1999, $201,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 
                for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (7) with respect to supplemental services under subpart D 
        of part 1 of subtitle E of title III--
                    (A) $24,600,000 for fiscal year 1996, $36,900,000 
                for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, 
                $61,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for 
                each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004; and
                    (B) with respect to awards to federally qualified 
                health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
                the Social Security Act) and rural health clinics under 
                such subpart, $57,400,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
                $86,100,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 
                1999, and $143,500,000 for fiscal year 2000 and 
                $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 
                2004;
            (8) with respect to the National Health Service Corps 
        program referred to under section 3471, $123,000,000 for each 
        of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997, and $201,000,000 for each of 
        the fiscal years 1998 through 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of 
        the fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (9) with respect to school-related health service programs 
        under subpart A of part 5 of subtitle G of title III, 
        $82,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $164,000,000 for fiscal year 
        1996, $266,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $369,000,000 for 
        fiscal year 1998, $471,500,000 for fiscal year 1999, 
        $574,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of 
        the fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (10) with respect to the development and operation of 
        comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
        programs under section 3534, $82,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 1995 through 2000, and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
        years 2001 through 2004;
            (11) with respect to programs of the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services under section 3081, $82,000,000 for each of 
        the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, $123,000,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 1997 through 2000 and $2,000,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 2001 through 2004;
            (12) with respect to programs of the Secretary of Labor 
        under section 3082, $164,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 
        1995 through 2000 and $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 
        2001 through 2004; and
            (13) with respect to programs of the Indian Health Service 
        under subtitle D of title VIII, $164,000,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 1995 through 2000 and $2,000,000 for each of the 
        fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
    (c) Authority to Transfer Funds.--The Committee on Appropriations 
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Appropriations of 
the Senate, acting through appropriations Acts, may transfer the 
amounts specified under subsection (b) in each fiscal year among the 
programs referred to in such subsection.
    (d) Report.--The Secretary shall review the effectiveness of the 
programs included in the Public Health Initiative. Not later than 
October 1, 1998, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a 
report concerning such review. Such report shall include 
recommendations concerning whether Congress should increase the program 
funding levels described in subsection (b) in fiscal years 2001 through 
2004 to a level equal to that of prior fiscal years.

       Subtitle I--Additional Provisions Regarding Public Health

SEC. 3901. CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION REGARDING DOMESTIC 
              VIOLENCE AND WOMEN'S HEALTH.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible 
entities for the purpose of implementing and developing for trainees a 
curriculum that includes training in identification, treatment and 
referral of victims of domestic violence and women's health needs.
    (b) Eligible Entities.--For purposes of subsection (a), eligible 
entities are any school of medicine, school of osteopathic medicine, 
school of public health, graduate program in mental health practice, 
school of nursing as defined in section 853 of the Public Health 
Service Act, a program to train physician assistants, a program for 
training allied health professionals, and a program for training of 
family medicine physicians, general internists, general pediatricians, 
geriatricians, and obstetrician/gynecologists.
    (c) Curriculum.--A curriculum developed under this section shall 
include--
            (1) identification of victims of domestic violence and 
        maintaining complete medical records that include documentation 
        of the examination, treatment provided, and referral made and 
        recording the location and nature of the victim's injuries;
            (2) examining and treating such victims within the scope of 
        the health professional's discipline, training, and practice, 
        including at a minimum providing medical advice regarding the 
        dynamics and nature of domestic violence;
            (3) referring the victims to public and nonprofit entities 
        that provide support services for such victims;
            (4) training in the identification and diagnosis of 
        diseases afflicting women and other medical disorders as they 
        affect women;
            (5) training in the treatment of such diseases and 
        disorders with emphasis on the unique needs of women; and
            (6) research into the causes of such diseases and 
        disorders, including determination of appropriate means of 
        prevention.
    (d) Allocation of Appropriations.--Of the amounts made available 
under section 3301(b) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 
not to exceed $20,000,000 for a fiscal year for carrying out this 
section.

SEC. 3902. COMMUNITY SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAMS.

    Section 338L of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254t) is 
amended--
            (1) in the section heading, by striking ``DEMONSTRATION'';
            (2) in subsection (a)--
                    (A) by striking ``for the purpose of carrying out 
                demonstration programs''; and
                    (B) by striking ``health manpower shortage areas'' 
                and inserting ``Federally-designated health 
                professional shortage areas'';
            (3) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) by striking ``health manpower shortage areas'' 
                and inserting ``Federally-designated health 
                professional shortage areas'' in the matter preceding 
                paragraph (1); and
                    (B) by striking ``in the health manpower shortage 
                areas in which the community organizations are 
                located,'' and inserting ``in a Federally-designated 
                health professional shortage area that is served by the 
                community organization awarding the scholarship,'' in 
                paragraph (2);
            (4) in subsection (e)(1)--
                    (A) by striking ``health manpower shortage area'' 
                and inserting ``a Federally-designated health 
                professional shortage area''; and
                    (B) by striking ``in which the community'' and all 
                that follows through ``located'';
            (5) in subsection (k)(2), by striking ``internal medicine'' 
        and all that follows through the end thereof and inserting 
        ``general internal medicine, general pediatrics, obstetrics and 
        gynecology, dentistry, or mental health, that are provided by 
        physicians or other health professionals.''; and
            (6) in subsection (l)(1), by striking ``$5,000,000'' and 
        all that follows through ``1993'' and inserting ``$1,000,000 
        for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for 
        each fiscal year thereafter''.

               Subtitle J--Occupational Safety and Health

SEC. 3903. OCCUPATIONAL INJURY AND ILLNESS PREVENTION.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the 
Secretary of Labor shall work together to develop and implement a 
comprehensive program to expand and coordinate initiatives to prevent 
occupational injuries and illnesses.
    (b) Secretary of Labor.--The Secretary of Labor after consultation 
with the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall directly or by 
grants or contracts--
            (1) provide for training and education programs for 
        employees and employers in the recognition and control of 
        workplace hazards and methods and measures to prevent 
        occupational injuries and illnesses;
            (2) develop model educational materials for training and 
        educating employees and employers on the recognition and 
        control of workplace hazards, including a core curriculum for 
        general safety and health training and materials related to 
        specific safety and health hazards; and
            (3) provide programs and services for technical assistance 
        to employers and employees on the recognition and control of 
        workplace safety and health hazards including programs for 
        onsite consultation.
Technical assistance and consultative services under paragraph (3) 
shall be provided in a manner that is separate from the enforcement 
programs conducted by the Secretary of Labor.
    (c) Secretary of Health and Human Services.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services after consultation with the Secretary of 
Labor shall directly or by grants or contracts--
            (1) provide education programs for training occupational 
        safety and health professionals including professionals in the 
        fields of occupational medicine, occupational health nursing, 
        industrial hygiene, safety engineering, toxicology and 
        epidemiology;
            (2) provide education programs for other health 
        professionals and health care providers and the public to 
        improve the recognition, treatment and prevention of 
        occupationally related injuries and illnesses;
            (3) conduct surveillance programs to identify patterns and 
        to determine the prevalence of occupational illnesses, injuries 
        and deaths related to exposure to particular safety and health 
        hazards;
            (4) conduct investigations and evaluations to determine if 
        workplace exposures to toxic chemicals, harmful physical agents 
        or potentially hazardous conditions pose a risk to exposed 
        employees; and
            (5) conduct research, demonstrations and experiments 
        relating to occupational safety and health to identify the 
        causes of and major factors contributing to occupational 
        illnesses and injuries.
    (d) National Advisory Board.--
            (1) Establishment.--There is established a National 
        Advisory Board for Occupational Injury and Illness Prevention 
        to provide oversight, advice and direction on the occupational 
        injury and illness prevention programs and initiatives 
        conducted by the Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Health and 
        Human Services.
            (2) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 10 members 
        appointed by the Secretary of Labor, 5 of whom are to be 
        designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Such 
        members shall be composed of representatives of employers, 
        employees, and occupational safety and health professionals.
    (e) Director of NIOSH.--The responsibilities of the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services established under this section shall be 
carried out by the Director of the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health.
    (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying 
out this section there are authorized to be appropriated $92,250,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000, and $2,000,000 for each 
of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.

                    Subtitle K--Full Funding for WIC

SEC. 3905. FULL FUNDING FOR WIC.

    Section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786) is 
amended--
            (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a)--
                    (A) by striking ``authorized'' and inserting 
                ``established''; and
                    (B) by striking ``, up to the authorization levels 
                set forth in subsection (g) of this section,'' and 
                inserting ``, up to the levels made available under 
                this section,'';
            (2) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by 
                striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall'';
                    (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``appropriated'' 
                and inserting ``made available'';
            (3) in subsection (g)--
                    (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
                following new paragraph:
    ``(1)(A) There are authorized to be --
            ``(i) appropriated to carry out this section such amounts 
        as are necessary for each of fiscal years 1995 through 2000; 
        and
            ``(ii) made available such amounts as are necessary for the 
        Secretary of the Treasury to fulfill the requirements of 
        subparagraph (B).
    ``(B)(i) Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall provide to the 
Secretary of Agriculture, on January 1 of each fiscal year, to carry 
out this subsection--
            ``(I) $444,000,000 for fiscal year 1996;
            ``(II) $696,000,000 for fiscal year 1997;
            ``(III) $775,000,000 for fiscal year 1998;
            ``(IV) $924,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and
            ``(V) $1,077,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
    ``(ii) The Secretary of Agriculture shall be entitled to receive 
the funds and shall accept the funds.
    ``(C) In lieu of obligating the funds made available under 
subparagraph (B) to carry out this subsection, if the amount 
appropriated (in addition to the amount appropriated under subparagraph 
(B)(i)) to carry out this subsection for--
            ``(i) fiscal year 1996 is less than $3,470,000,000, the 
        amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(I) shall be obligated 
        by the Secretary, during the period beginning December 31, 
        1995, and ending June 30, 1996, to increase the special 
        assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of the 
        National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1759a(a)) for free lunches 
        served under the school lunch program (as established under 
        section 4 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1753));
            ``(ii) fiscal year 1997 is less than $3,470,000,000, the 
        amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(II) shall be 
        obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
        December 31, 1996, and ending June 30, 1997, to increase the 
        special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
        such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
        (as established under section 4 of such Act);
            ``(iii) fiscal year 1998 is less than $3,470,000,000, the 
        amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(III) shall be 
        obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
        December 31, 1997, and ending June 30, 1998, to increase the 
        special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
        such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
        (as established under section 4 of such Act);
            ``(iv) fiscal year 1999 is less than $3,470,000,000, the 
        amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(IV) shall be 
        obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
        December 31, 1998, and ending June 30, 1999, to increase the 
        special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
        such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
        (as established under section 4 of such Act); and
            ``(v) fiscal year 2000 is less than $3,470,000,000, the 
        amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(V) shall be obligated 
        by the Secretary, during the period beginning December 31, 
        1999, and ending June 30, 2000, to increase the special 
        assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of such Act 
        for free lunches served under the school lunch program (as 
        established under section 4 of such Act).
    ``(D) Any increase in the special assistance factor prescribed 
under section 11(a) of such Act as a result of subparagraph (C) shall 
not affect any annual adjustment in the factor under section 11(a)(3) 
of such Act.
    ``(E) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no additional 
amounts shall be made available under this paragraph for any fiscal 
year after fiscal year 2000.'';
                    (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (4), by 
                striking ``appropriated'' and inserting ``made 
                available''; and
                    (C) in paragraph (5), by striking ``appropriated'' 
                and inserting ``made available'';
            (4) in subsection (h)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1)--
                            (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
                        ``appropriated'' both places it appears and 
                        inserting ``made available''; and
                            (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
                        ``appropriated'' both places it appears and 
                        inserting ``made available''; and
                    (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (2)(A), by 
                striking ``1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994'' and 
                inserting ``1990 through 2000''; and
            (5) in subsection (l), by striking ``funds appropriated'' 
        and inserting ``funds made available''.

                 Subtitle L--Border Health Improvement

SEC. 3908. BORDER HEALTH COMMISSION.

    (a) Establishment.--The President is authorized and encouraged to 
conclude an agreement with Mexico to establish a binational commission 
to be known as the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission.
    (b) Duties.--It should be the duty of the Commission--
            (1) to conduct a comprehensive needs assessment in the 
        United States-Mexico Border Area for the purposes of 
        identifying, evaluating, preventing, and resolving health 
        problems and potential health problems that affect the general 
        population of the area;
            (2) to develop and implement a comprehensive plan for 
        carrying out the actions recommended by the needs assessment 
        through--
                    (A) assisting in the coordination of public and 
                private efforts to prevent potential health problems 
                and resolve existing health problems,
                    (B) assisting in the coordination of public and 
                private efforts to educate the population, in a 
                culturally competent manner, concerning such potential 
                and existing health problems; and
                    (C) developing and implementing culturally 
                competent programs to prevent and resolve such health 
                problems and to educate the population, in a culturally 
                competent manner, concerning such health problems where 
                a new program is necessary to meet a need that is not 
                being met through other public or private efforts; and
            (3) to formulate recommendations to the Governments of the 
        United States and Mexico concerning a fair and reasonable 
        method by which the government of one country could reimburse a 
        public or private person in the other country for the cost of a 
        health care service that such person furnishes to a citizen or 
        resident alien of the first country who is unable, through 
        insurance or otherwise, to pay for the service.
    (c) Other Authorized Functions.--In addition to the duties 
described in subsection (b), the Commission should be authorized to 
perform the following functions as the Commission determines to be 
appropriate--
            (1) to conduct or support investigations, research, or 
        studies designed to identify, study, and monitor, on an on-
        going basis, health problems that affect the general population 
        in the United States-Mexico Border Area;
            (2) to conduct or support a binational, public-private 
        effort to establish a comprehensive and coordinated system, 
        which uses advanced technologies to the maximum extent 
        possible, for gathering health-related data and monitoring 
        health problems in the United States-Mexico Border Area; and
            (3) to provide financial, technical, or administrative 
        assistance to public or private persons who act to prevent or 
        resolve such problems or who educate the population concerning 
        such health problems.
    (d) Membership.--
            (1) Number and appointment of united states section.--The 
        United States section of the Commission should be composed of 
        13 members. The section should consist of the following 
        members:
                    (A) The Secretary of Health and Human Services or 
                the Secretary's delegate.
                    (B) The commissioners of health or chief health 
                officer from the States of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, 
                and California or such commissioners' delegates.
                    (C) Two individuals residing in United States-
                Mexico Border Area in each of the States of Texas, New 
                Mexico, Arizona, and California who are nominated by 
                the chief executive officer of the respective States 
                and appointed by the President from among individuals--
                            (i) who have a demonstrated interest or 
                        expertise in health issues of the United 
                        States-Mexico Border Area; and
                            (ii) whose name appears on a list of 6 
                        nominees submitted to the President by the 
                        chief executive officer of the State where the 
                        nominees resides.
            (2) Commissioner.--The Commissioner of the United States 
        section of the Commission should be the Secretary of Health and 
        Human Services or such individual's delegate to the Commission. 
        The Commissioner should be the leader of the section.
            (3) Compensation.--Members of the United States section of 
        the Commission who are not employees of the United States--
                    (A) shall each receive compensation at a rate of 
                not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate 
                of basic pay payable for positions at GS-15 of the 
                General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United 
                States Code, for each day such member is engaged in the 
                actual performance of the duties of the Commission; and
                    (B) shall be allowed travel expenses, including per 
                diem in lieu of subsistence at rates authorized for 
                employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 
                of title 5, United States Code, while away from their 
                homes or regular places of business in the performance 
                of services of the Commission.
    (e) Regional Offices.--The Commission should designate or establish 
one border health office in each of the States of Texas, New Mexico, 
Arizona, and California. Such office should be located within the 
United States-Mexico Border Area, and should be coordinated with--
            (1) State border health offices; and
            (2) local nonprofit organizations designated by the State's 
        governor and directly involved in border health issues.
If feasible to avoid duplicative efforts, the Commission offices should 
be located in existing State or local nonprofit offices. The Commission 
should provide adequate compensation for cooperative efforts and 
resources.
    (f) Reports.--Not later than February 1 of each year that occurs 
more than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Commission, 
the Commission should submit an annual report to both the United States 
Government and the Government of Mexico regarding all activities of the 
Commission during the preceding calendar year.
    (g) Definitions.--As used in this section:
            (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the United 
        States-Mexico Border Health Commission.
            (2) Health problem.--The term ``health problem'' means a 
        disease or medical ailment or an environmental condition that 
        poses the risk of disease or medical ailment. Such term 
        includes diseases, ailments, or risks of disease or ailment 
        caused by or related to environmental factors, control of 
        animals and rabies, control of insect and rodent vectors, 
        disposal of solid and hazardous waste, and control and 
        monitoring of air quality.
            (3) Resident alien.--The term ``resident alien'', when used 
        in reference to a country, means an alien lawfully admitted for 
        permanent residence to the United States or otherwise 
        permanently residing in the United States under color of law 
        (including residence as an asylee, refugee, or parolee).
            (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services.
            (5) United states-mexico border area.--The term ``United 
        States-Mexico Border Area'' means the area located in the 
        United States and Mexico within 100 kilometers of the border 
        between the United States and Mexico.

                    TITLE IV--MEDICARE AND MEDICAID

SEC. 4000. REFERENCES IN TITLE.

    (a) Amendments to Social Security Act.--Except as otherwise 
specifically provided, whenever in this title an amendment is expressed 
in terms of an amendment to or repeal of a section or other provision, 
the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other 
provision of the Social Security Act.
    (b) References to OBRA.--In this title, the terms ``OBRA-1986'', 
``OBRA-1987'', ``OBRA-1989'', ``OBRA-1990'', and ``OBRA-1993'' refer to 
the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-509), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-203), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989 (Public Law 101-239), the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508), and the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-66), 
respectively.

                          Subtitle A--Medicare

             PART 1--INTEGRATION OF MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES

SEC. 4001. INDIVIDUAL ELECTION TO REMAIN IN CERTAIN HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1876 (42 U.S.C. 1395mm) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(k)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, each 
eligible organization with a risk-sharing contract (or which is 
eligible to enter into such a contract, as determined by the Secretary) 
that is the sponsor of a standard health plan under subtitle B of title 
I of the Health Security Act shall provide each individual who meets 
the requirements of paragraph (2) with the opportunity to elect (by 
submitting an application at such time and in such manner as specified 
by the Secretary) to continue enrollment in such plan (for the same 
benefits as other individuals enrolled in the plan) and to have 
payments made by the Secretary to the plan on the individual's behalf 
in accordance with paragraph (3). The premium imposed with respect to 
such an individual by the plan shall be in an amount (determined in 
accordance with rules of the Secretary and notwithstanding other 
provisions of such Act) which reflects the difference between the 
premium otherwise established (adjusted by a factor to reflect the 
actuarial difference between medicare beneficiaries and other plan 
enrollees) and the amount payable under paragraph (3).
    ``(2) An individual meets the requirements of this paragraph if the 
individual is--
            ``(A) enrolled in the health plan of an eligible 
        organization in a month in which the individual is either not 
        entitled to benefits under part A, or is an employee (as 
        defined in the Health Security Act) or the spouse or dependent 
        of an employee,
            ``(B) entitled to benefits under part A and enrolled under 
        part B in the succeeding month,
            ``(C) a community-rated individual under the Health 
        Security Act in that succeeding month, and
            ``(D) not an experience-rated employee (as defined in the 
        Health Security Act) or the spouse or dependent of an 
        experience-rated employee in that succeeding month.
    ``(3) The Secretary shall make a payment to an eligible 
organization on behalf of each individual enrolled with the 
organization for whom an election is in effect under this subsection in 
an amount determined by the rate specified by subsection (a)(1)(C) 
(notwithstanding the second sentence of paragraph (1)). Such payment 
shall be made from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the 
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund as provided under 
subsection (a)(5) (other than as provided under subparagraph (B) of 
that paragraph).
    ``(4) The period for which payment may be made under paragraph 
(3)--
            ``(A) begins with the first month for which the individual 
        meets the requirements of paragraph (2) (or a later month, in 
        the case of a late application, as may be specified by the 
        Secretary); and
            ``(B) ends with the earliest of--
                    ``(i) the month following the month--
                            ``(I) in which the individual notifies the 
                        Secretary that the individual no longer wishes 
                        to be enrolled in the health plan of the 
                        eligible organization and to have payment made 
                        on the individual's behalf under this 
                        subsection; and
                            ``(II) which is a month specified by the 
                        Secretary as a uniform open enrollment period 
                        under subsection (c)(3)(A)(i), or
                    ``(ii) the month in which the individual ceases to 
                meet the requirements of paragraph (2).
    ``(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, payments 
to an eligible organization under this subsection on behalf of an 
individual shall be the sole payments made with respect to items and 
services furnished to the individual during the period for which the 
individual's election under this subsection is in effect.''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1838(b) (42 U.S.C. 1395q(b)) is 
amended by inserting after ``section 1843(e)'' the following: ``, 
1876(c)(3)(B) or 1876(k)(4)(B)''.

SEC. 4002. ENROLLMENT AND TERMINATION OF ENROLLMENT.

    (a) Uniform Open Enrollment Periods.--
            (1) For capitated plans.--The first sentence of section 
        1876(c)(3)(A)(i) (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(c)(3)(A)(i)) is amended by 
        inserting ``(which may be specified by the Secretary)'' after 
        ``open enrollment period''.
            (2) For medigap plans.--Section 1882(s) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395ss(s)) is amended--
                    (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``paragraphs (1) 
                and (2)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1), (2), or (3)'',
                    (B) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
                (4), and
                    (C) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following 
                new paragraph:
    ``(3) Each issuer of a medicare supplemental policy shall have an 
open enrollment period (which shall be the period specified by the 
Secretary under section 1876(c)(3)(A)(i)), of at least 30 days duration 
every year, during which the issuer may not deny or condition the 
issuance or effectiveness of a medicare supplemental policy, or 
discriminate in the pricing of the policy, because of age, health 
status, claims experience, receipt of health care, or medical 
condition. The policy may not provide any time period applicable to 
pre-existing conditions, waiting periods, elimination periods, and 
probationary periods (except as provided by paragraph (2)(B)). The 
Secretary may require enrollment through a third party designated under 
section 1876(c)(3)(B).''.
    (b) Enrollments for New Medicare Beneficiaries and Those Who 
Move.--Section 1876(c)(3)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(c)(3)(A)) is amended--
            (1) in clause (i), by striking ``clause (ii)'' and 
        inserting ``clauses (ii) through (iv)'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(iii) Each eligible organization shall have an open enrollment 
period for each individual eligible to enroll under subsection (d) 
during any enrollment period specified by section 1837 that applies to 
that individual. Enrollment under this clause shall be effective as 
specified by section 1838.
    ``(iv) Each eligible organization shall have an open enrollment 
period for each individual eligible to enroll under subsection (d) who 
has previously resided outside the geographic area which the 
organization serves. The enrollment period shall begin with the 
beginning of the month that precedes the month in which the individual 
becomes a resident of that geographic area and shall end at the end of 
the following month. Enrollment under this clause shall be effective as 
of the first of the month following the month in which the individual 
enrolls.''.
    (c) Enrollment Through Third Party; Uniform Termination of 
Enrollment.--The first sentence of section 1876(c)(3)(B) (42 U.S.C. 
1395mm(c)(3)(B)) is amended--
            (1) by inserting ``(including enrollment through a third 
        party)'' after ``regulations'', and
            (2) by striking everything after ``with the eligible 
        organization'' and inserting ``during an annual period as 
        prescribed by the Secretary, and as specified by the Secretary 
        in the case of financial insolvency of the organization, if the 
        individual moves from the geographic area served by the 
        organization, or in other special circumstances that the 
        Secretary may prescribe.''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by the previous 
subsections apply to enrollments and terminations of enrollments 
occurring after 1995 (but only after the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services has prescribed the relevant annual period), except that the 
amendments made by subsection (a)(2) apply to enrollments for a 
medicare supplemental policy made after 1995.

                 PART 2--PROVISIONS RELATING TO PART A

SEC. 4101. INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES UPDATE FOR PPS HOSPITALS.

    Section 1886(b)(3)(B)(i) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(b)(3)(B)(i)) is 
amended--
            (1) by amending subclause (XII) to read as follows:
            ``(XII) for fiscal years 1997 through 2000, the market 
        basket percentage minus 2.0 percentage points for hospitals in 
        all areas, and''; and
            (2) in subclause (XIII), by striking ``1998'' and inserting 
        ``2001''.

SEC. 4102. REDUCTION IN PAYMENTS FOR CAPITAL-RELATED COSTS FOR 
              INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES.

    (a) PPS Hospitals.--
            (1) Reduction in base payment rates for pps hospitals.--
        Section 1886(g)(1)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(g)(1)(A)) is amended by 
        adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In addition to 
        the reduction described in the preceding sentence, for 
        discharges occurring after September 30, 1995, the Secretary 
        shall reduce by 7.31 percent the unadjusted standard Federal 
        capital payment rate (as described in 42 CFR 412.308(c), as in 
        effect on the date of the enactment of the Health Security Act) 
        and shall reduce by 10.41 percent the unadjusted hospital-
        specific rate (as described in 42 CFR 412.328(e)(1), as in 
        effect on the date of the enactment of the Health Security 
        Act).''.
            (2) Reduction in update.--Section 1886(g)(1) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395ww(g)(1)) is amended--
                    (A) in subparagraph (B)(i)--
                            (i) by striking ``and (II)'' and inserting 
                        ``(II)'', and
                            (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end 
                        and inserting the following: ``, and (III) an 
                        annual update factor established for the 
                        prospective payment rates applicable to 
                        discharges in a fiscal year which (subject to 
                        reduction under subparagraph (C)) will be based 
                        upon such factor as the Secretary determines 
                        appropriate to take into account amounts 
                        necessary for the efficient and effective 
                        delivery of medically appropriate and necessary 
                        care of high quality;'';
                    (B) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
                subparagraph (D); and
                    (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the 
                following new subparagraph:
            ``(C)(i) With respect to payments attributable to portions 
        of cost reporting periods or discharges occurring during each 
        of the fiscal years 1996 through 2003, the Secretary shall 
        include a reduction in the annual update factor established 
        under subparagraph (B)(i)(III) for discharges in the year equal 
        to the applicable update reduction described in clause (ii) to 
        adjust for excessive increases in capital costs per discharge 
        for fiscal years prior to fiscal year 1992 (but in no event may 
        such reduction result in an annual update factor less than 
        zero).
            ``(ii) In clause (i), the term `applicable update 
        reduction' means, with respect to the update factor for a 
        fiscal year--
                    ``(I) 4.9 percentage points; or
                    ``(II) if the annual update factor for the previous 
                fiscal year was less than the applicable update 
                reduction for the previous year, the sum of 4.9 
                percentage points and the difference between the annual 
                update factor for the previous year and the applicable 
                update reduction for the previous year.''.
    (b) PPS-Exempt Hospitals.--Section 1861(v)(1) (42 U.S.C. 
1395x(v)(1)) is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
    ``(T) Such regulations shall provide that, in determining the 
amount of the payments that may be made under this title with respect 
to the capital-related costs of inpatient hospital services furnished 
by a hospital that is not a subsection (d) hospital (as defined in 
section 1886(d)(1)(B)) or a subsection (d) Puerto Rico hospital (as 
defined in section 1886(d)(9)(A)), the Secretary shall reduce the 
amounts of such payments otherwise established under this title by 15 
percent for payments attributable to portions of cost reporting periods 
occurring during each of the fiscal years 1996 through 2003.''.

SEC. 4103. REDUCTIONS IN DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1886(d)(5)(F) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(F)) 
is amended--
            (1) in clause (ii), by striking ``The amount'' and 
        inserting ``Subject to clause (ix), the amount'';
            (2) in clause (vi), by striking ``In'' and inserting 
        ``Subject to clause (x), in''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
    ``(ix) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subparagraph, 
the Secretary shall reduce the amount of any additional payment made to 
a hospital under this subparagraph by an amount equal to the sum of--
            ``(I) for discharges occurring on or after the date on 
        which the State in which such hospital is located becomes a 
        participating State (as such term is defined in title I of the 
        Health Security Act), 33 percent of such additional payment.''.

SEC. 4104. EXTENSION OF FREEZE ON UPDATES TO ROUTINE SERVICE COST 
              LIMITS FOR SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES.

    (a) Payments Based on Cost Limits.--Section 1888(a) (42 U.S.C. 
1395yy(a)) is amended by striking ``112 percent'' each place it appears 
and inserting ``100 percent (adjusted by such amount as the Secretary 
determines to be necessary to preserve the savings resulting from the 
enactment of section 13503(a)(1) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation 
Act of 1993)''.
    (b) Adjustments to Limits.--Section 1888(c) (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(c)) 
is amended by inserting the following sentence at the end: ``The effect 
of the amendment made by section 4104(a) of the Health Security Act 
shall not be considered by the Secretary in making adjustments pursuant 
to this subsection.''
    (c) Payments Determined on Prospective Basis.--Section 
1888(d)(2)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1395yy(d)(2)(B)) is amended by striking ``105 
percent'' and inserting ``100 percent (adjusted by such amount as the 
Secretary determines to be necessary to preserve the savings resulting 
from the enactment of section 13503(b) of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1993)''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a), (b), 
and (c) shall apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after 
October 1, 1995.

SEC. 4105. MEDICARE-DEPENDENT, SMALL RURAL HOSPITALS.

    (a) Clarification of Additional Payment.--Section 
1886(d)(5)(G)(ii)(I) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(G)(ii)(I)) is amended by 
striking ``the first 3 12-month cost reporting periods that begin'' and 
inserting ``the 36-month period beginning with the first day of the 
cost reporting period that begins''.
    (b) Special Treatment Extended.--Section 1886(d)(5)(G) (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(d)(5)(G)) is amended--
            (1) in clause (i), by striking ``October 1, 1994'' and 
        inserting ``October 1, 1999''; and
            (2) in clause (ii)(II), by striking ``October 1, 1994'' and 
        inserting ``October 1, 1999''.
    (c) Extension of Target Amount.--Section 1886(b)(3)(D) (42 U.S.C. 
1395ww(b)(3)(D)) is amended--
            (1) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ``March 
        31, 1993'' and inserting ``September 30, 1999''; and
            (2) by amending clause (iii) to read as follows:
            ``(iii) with respect to discharges occurring in fiscal 
        years 1994 through 1999, the target amount for the cost 
        reporting period beginning in the previous fiscal year 
        increased by the applicable percentage increase under 
        subparagraph (B)(iv).''.

SEC. 4106. PROVISIONS RELATING TO RURAL HEALTH TRANSITION GRANT 
              PROGRAM.

    (a) Eligibility of Rural Primary Care Hospitals for Grants.--
            (1) In general.--Section 4005(e)(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
        Reconciliation Act of 1987 is amended in the matter preceding 
        subparagraph (A) by inserting ``any rural primary care hospital 
        as defined in section 1861(mm)(1), or'' after ``means''.
            (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
        shall apply to grants made on or after October 1, 1993.
    (b) Extension of Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 
4005(e)(9) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 is amended--
            (1) by striking ``1989 and'' and inserting ``1989,''; and
            (2) by striking ``1992'' and inserting ``1992 and 
        $30,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1993 through 1999''.
    (c) Frequency of Required Reports.--Section 4008(e)(8)(B) of the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 is amended by striking 
``every 6 months'' and inserting ``every 12 months''.

SEC. 4107. PAYMENTS FOR SOLE COMMUNITY HOSPITALS WITH TEACHING PROGRAMS 
              AND MULTIHOSPITAL CAMPUSES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1886(d)(5)(D) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(D)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new clause:
    ``(vi) The Secretary shall determine payment under clause (i) for a 
sole-community hospital that is a part of a multi-campus hospital by 
making the determination under such clause for each facility of the 
multi-campus hospital if any facility of the hospital would have a 
value of `r' greater than 0, as `r' is defined in subparagraph (B)(ii). 
In making a determination for each such facility, the Secretary shall 
determine the DRG-specific rate applicable to the facility based on its 
location in accordance with paragraph (3)(D).''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1993, from multi-
campus hospitals that merged facilities on or after October 1, 1987.

SEC. 4108. MORATORIUM ON DESIGNATION OF NEW LONG-TERM HOSPITALS.

    Notwithstanding clause (iv) of section 1886(d)(1)(B) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(1)(B)), a hospital which has an 
average inpatient length of stay (as determined by the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services) of greater than 25 days shall not be treated 
as a hospital described in such clause for purposes of such title 
unless such hospital was treated as a hospital described in such clause 
for purposes of such title as of the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4109. REVISED PAYMENT METHODOLOGY FOR REHABILITATION AND LONG-TERM 
              CARE HOSPITALS.

    (a) Rehabilitation Hospitals and Distinct Part Units.--
            (1) Definition.--Section 1886(d)(1)(B) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395ww(d)(1)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
        new sentence: ``In defining a rehabilitation hospital and a 
        rehabilitation unit of a hospital which is a distinct part of a 
        hospital, the Secretary shall take into account the impact of 
        new technologies, survival rates, and changes in the practice 
        of rehabilitation medicine.''.
            (2) Target amount calculation for rehabilitation hospitals 
        and distinct part units.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 1886(b)(3) (42 U.S.C. 
                1395ww(b)(3)) is amended--
                            (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``(D), 
                        and (E)'' and inserting ``(D), (E), and (F)'';
                            (ii) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking 
                        ``and (E)'' and inserting ``(E), and (F)''; and
                            (iii) by adding at the end the following 
                        new subparagraph:
                    ``(F)(i) Subject to clause (ii), for cost reporting 
                periods beginning on or after October 1, 1994, in the 
                case of a hospital described in subsection 
                (d)(1)(B)(ii) or a rehabilitation unit described in 
                such subparagraph, the term `target amount' means--
                            ``(I) with respect to the first 12-month 
                        cost reporting period in which this 
                        subparagraph is applied to the hospital or 
                        unit--
                                    ``(aa) the allowable operating 
                                costs of inpatient hospital services 
                                (as defined in subsection (a)(4)) 
                                recognized under this title for the 
                                hospital or unit for the 12-month cost 
                                reporting period (in this subparagraph 
                                referred to as the `base cost reporting 
                                period') preceding the first cost 
                                reporting period for which this 
                                subparagraph was in effect with respect 
                                to such hospital, increased (in a 
                                compounded manner), by
                                    ``(bb) the applicable percentage 
                                increases applied to such hospital or 
                                unit under this paragraph for cost 
                                reporting periods after the base cost 
                                reporting period and up to and 
                                including such first 12-month cost 
                                reporting period, or
                            ``(II) with respect to a later cost 
                        reporting period, the target amount for the 
                        preceding 12-month cost reporting period, 
                        increased by the applicable percentage increase 
                        under subparagraph (B).
                There shall be substituted for the allowable average 
                costs of inpatient hospital services determined under 
                subclause (I)(aa), the average of the allowable average 
                costs of inpatient hospital services (as so defined) 
                recognized under this title for the hospital or unit 
                for cost reporting periods beginning during fiscal 
                years 1990 and 1991 (if any).
                    ``(ii)(I) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 
                (i), in the case of a hospital or unit to which the 
                last sentence of clause (i) applies, the hospital or 
                unit's target amount under such clause for a cost 
                reporting period shall be--
                            ``(aa) not less than 70 percent of the 
                        national weighted average of all target amounts 
                        calculated under such clause for all hospitals 
                        and units described in such clause (as 
                        determined by the Secretary), and
                            ``(bb) not less than the allowable 
                        operating costs of inpatient hospital services 
                        (as defined in subsection (a)(4) for such 
                        hospital or unit in the base cost reporting 
                        period (including any payments made to such 
                        hospital or unit pursuant to paragraph (1)(A)), 
                        multiplied by the applicable percentage 
                        increase for such cost reporting period under 
                        subparagraph (B).
                    ``(II) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 
                (i), in the case of a hospital or unit that is not 
                described in subclause (I), the hospital or unit's 
                target amount under such clause for a cost reporting 
                period shall be--
                            ``(aa) not less than the amount described 
                        in subclause (I)(aa), and
                            ``(bb) not greater than 110 percent of the 
                        national weighted average of all target amounts 
                        calculated under clause (i) for all hospitals 
                        and units described in such clause (as 
                        determined by the Secretary).''.
                    (B) Effective date.--The amendments made by 
                subparagraph (A) shall apply with respect to cost 
                reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 
                1994.
            (3) Development of national prospective rates for 
        rehabilitation hospitals and distinct part units.--
                    (A) Development of proposal.--The Secretary of 
                Health and Human Services (hereafter in this section 
                referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall develop a 
                proposal to replace the current system under which 
                rehabilitation hospitals and rehabilitation units of a 
                hospital which are a distinct part of a hospital (as 
                described in section 1886(d)(1)(B) of the Social 
                Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(1)(B))) receive 
                payment for the operating and capital-related costs of 
                inpatient hospital services under part A of title XVIII 
                of such Act with a prospective payment system. In 
                developing any proposal under this paragraph to replace 
                the current system with a prospective payment system, 
                the Secretary shall develop a system that provides 
                for--
                            (i) a payment on a per-discharge basis, and
                            (ii) an appropriate weighting of such 
                        payment amount as it relates to the 
                        classification of the discharge.
                    (B) Reports.--Not later than October 1, 1996, the 
                Secretary shall submit the proposal developed under 
                subparagraph (A) to the Congress.
    (b) Assignment of New Base Year for Certified Long-Stay Hospitals 
That Also Serve a Significant Proportion of Low-Income Patients.--
            (1) Rebasing for long-term hospitals.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 1886(b)(3) (42 U.S.C. 
                1395ww(b)(3)), as amended by subsection (a), is further 
                amended--
                            (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``(E), 
                        and (F)'' and inserting ``(E), (F), and (G)'';
                            (ii) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking 
                        ``(E), and (F)'' and inserting ``(E), (F), and 
                        (G)''; and
                            (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (F) 
                        the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(G)(i) For cost reporting periods beginning on or 
                after October 1, 1994, in the case of a hospital 
                described in subsection (d)(1)(B)(iv) that--
                            ``(I) has not received the additional 
                        payment amount described in paragraph (1)(A) 
                        for at least the preceding 2 consecutive 12-
                        month cost reporting periods; and
                            ``(II) for which the sum of the amounts 
                        described in subclauses (I) and (II) of 
                        subsection (d)(5)(F)(vi) during the period 
                        described in clause (I) exceeds 25 percent,
                the term `target amount' has the meaning given such 
                term by clause (ii).
                    ``(ii) In the case of a hospital described in 
                clause (i), the term `target amount' means--
                            ``(I) with respect to the first 12-month 
                        cost reporting period in which this 
                        subparagraph is applied to the hospital--
                                    ``(aa) the average allowable 
                                operating costs of inpatient hospital 
                                services (as defined in subsection 
                                (a)(4)) recognized under this title for 
                                the hospital during cost reporting 
                                periods of the hospital beginning 
                                during fiscal years 1990 and 1991 for 
                                such hospital (in this subparagraph 
                                referred to as the `base cost reporting 
                                period'), increased (in a compounded 
                                manner), by
                                    ``(bb) the applicable percentage 
                                increases applied to such hospital or 
                                under this paragraph for cost reporting 
                                periods after the base cost reporting 
                                period and up to and including such 
                                first 12-month cost reporting periods, 
                                or
                            ``(II) with respect to a subsequent 12-
                        month cost reporting period, the target amount 
                        for the preceding 12-month cost reporting 
                        period, increased by the applicable percentage 
                        increase under subparagraph (B).
                    ``(iii) Notwithstanding clause (ii)(II), if, after 
                2 consecutive 12-month cost reporting periods, a 
                hospital continues to be described in subclauses (I) 
                and (II) of clause (i), there shall be substituted for 
                the base cost reporting period described in clause 
                (ii)(I)(aa) the most recent preceding 2 12-month cost 
                reporting periods of the hospital for which data is 
                available (as determined by the Secretary), but only if 
                such substituting results in an increase in the target 
                amount for the hospital. The substitution under the 
                preceding sentence may not occur more often than every 
                2 years.
                    ``(iv) Effective October 1, 1994, the Secretary 
                shall take into account the enactment of this 
                subparagraph in making available to the hospital the 
                payments described in section 1815(e)(2), and, shall 
                increase such payments as if the target amount of the 
                hospital had been established pursuant to this 
                subparagraph as of such date.''.
            (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall be effective with respect to cost reporting periods 
        beginning on or after October 1, 1994.

SEC. 4110. TERMINATION OF INDIRECT MEDICAL EDUCATION PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1886(d)(5)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(B)) 
is amended in the matter preceding clause (i) by striking ``The 
Secretary'' and inserting ``For discharges occurring before January 1, 
1997, the Secretary''.
    (b) Adjustment to Standardized Amounts.--Section 1886(d)(2)(C)(i) 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(2)(C)(i)) is amended by striking ``excluding'' and 
inserting ``for discharges occurring before January 1, 1997, 
excluding''.

SEC. 4111. LIMITED SERVICE HOSPITAL PROGRAM.

    (a) Limited Service Hospital Program.--Section 1820 (42 U.S.C. 
13951-4) is amended to read as follows:

                   ``limited service hospital program

    ``Sec. 1820. (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to--
            ``(1) make available alternative hospital models to small 
        rural or isolated rural communities in which facilities are 
        relieved of the burden of selected regulatory requirements by 
        limiting the scope of inpatient acute services required to be 
        offered;
            ``(2) alter medicare reimbursement policy to support the 
        financial viability of alternative facilities by limiting the 
        financial risk faced by such small hospitals through the use of 
        reasonable cost reimbursement; and
            ``(3) promote linkages between facilities designated by the 
        State under this section and broader programs supporting the 
        development of and transition to integrated provider networks.
    ``(b) In General.--Any State that submits an application in 
accordance with subsection (c) may establish a limited service hospital 
program described in subsection (d).
    ``(c) Application.--A State may establish a limited service 
hospital program described in subsection (d) if the State submits to 
the Secretary at such time and in such form as the Secretary may 
require an application containing--
            ``(1) assurances that the State--
                    ``(A) has developed, or is in the process of 
                developing, a State rural health care plan that--
                            ``(i) in the case of a State applying to 
                        establish a rural primary care hospital program 
                        (described in subsection (d)(1)(A)), provides 
                        for the creation of one or more rural health 
                        networks (as defined in subsection (e)) in the 
                        State,
                            ``(ii) promotes regionalization of rural 
                        health services in the State, and
                            ``(iii) improves access to hospital and 
                        other health services for rural residents of 
                        the State;
                    ``(B) has developed the rural health care plan 
                described in subparagraph (A) in consultation with the 
                hospital association of the State, rural hospitals 
                located in the State, and the State Office of Rural 
                Health (or, in the case of a State in the process of 
                developing such plan, that assures the Secretary that 
                it will consult with its State hospital association, 
                rural hospitals located in the State, and the State 
                Office of Rural Health in developing such plan); and
            ``(2) assurances that the State has designated (consistent 
        with the rural health care plan described in paragraph (1)(A)), 
        or is in the process of designating, rural nonprofit or public 
        hospitals or facilities located in the State as rural primary 
        care hospitals facilities or medical assistance facilities; and
            ``(3) such other information and assurances as the 
        Secretary may require.
    ``(d) Limited Service Hospital Program Described.--
            ``(1) In general.--A State that has submitted an 
        application in accordance with subsection (c), may establish a 
        limited service hospital program that includes--
                    ``(A) a rural primary care hospital program under 
                which--
                            ``(i) at least one facility in the State 
                        shall be designated as a rural primary care 
                        hospital in accordance with paragraph (2), and
                            ``(ii) the State shall develop at least one 
                        rural health network (as defined in subsection 
                        (e)) in the State;
                    ``(B) a medical assistance facility program under 
                which at least one facility in the State shall be 
                designated as a medical assistance facility in 
                accordance with paragraph (2); or
                    ``(C) both.
            ``(2) State designation of facilities.--A State may 
        designate one or more facilities as a rural primary care 
        hospital or medical assistance facility in accordance with 
        subparagraph (A) or (B).
                    ``(A) Criteria for designation as rural primary 
                care hospital.--A State may designate a facility as a 
                rural primary care hospital only if the facility--
                            ``(i) is located in a rural area (as 
                        defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)), or is 
                        located in a county whose geographic area is 
                        substantially larger than the average 
                        geographic area for urban counties in the 
                        United States and whose hospital service area 
                        is characteristic of service areas of hospitals 
                        located in rural areas;
                            ``(ii) at the time such facility applies to 
                        the State for designation as a rural primary 
                        care hospital, is a hospital (or, in the case 
                        of a facility that closed during the 12-month 
                        period that ends on the date the facility 
                        applies for such designation, at the time the 
                        facility closed), with a participation 
                        agreement in effect under section 1866(a);
                            ``(iii) has in effect an agreement to 
                        participate with other hospitals and facilities 
                        in a rural health network;
                            ``(iv) provides 24-hour emergency services 
                        to ill or injured persons prior to admission to 
                        the facility or prior to their transportation 
                        to a full-service hospital;
                            ``(v) provides not more than 15 inpatient 
                        beds (meeting such conditions as the Secretary 
                        may establish) for providing acute inpatient 
                        care;
                            ``(vi) provides inpatient care for a period 
                        not to exceed an average length of 96 hours 
                        (unless a longer period is required because 
                        transfer to a hospital is precluded because of 
                        inclement weather or other emergency 
                        conditions);
                            ``(vii) meets such staffing requirements as 
                        would apply under section 1861(e), to a 
                        hospital located in a rural area, except that--
                                    ``(I) the facility need not meet 
                                hospital standards relating to the 
                                number of hours during a day, or days 
                                during a week, in which the facility 
                                must be open and fully staffed, except 
                                insofar as the facility is required to 
                                provide emergency care on a 24-hour 
                                basis under clause (v) and must have 
                                nursing services available on a 24-hour 
                                basis, but need not otherwise staff the 
                                facility except when an inpatient is 
                                present,
                                    ``(II) the facility may provide any 
                                services otherwise required to be 
                                provided by a full-time, onsite 
                                dietician, pharmacist, laboratory 
                                technician, medical technologist, and 
                                radiological technologist on a part-
                                time, offsite basis under arrangements 
                                as defined in section 1861(w)(1), and
                                    ``(III) the inpatient care 
                                described in clause (vii) may be 
                                provided by a physician's assistant, 
                                nurse practitioner, or clinical nurse 
                                specialist subject to the oversight of 
                                a physician who need not be present in 
                                the facility, and
                            ``(viii) meets the requirements of 
                        subparagraphs (C) through (I) of paragraph (2) 
                        of section 1861(aa), and of clauses (ii) and 
                        (iv) of the second sentence of that paragraph, 
                        except that in determining whether a facility 
                        meets the requirements of this subparagraph, 
                        subparagraphs (E) and (F) of that paragraph 
                        shall be applied as if any reference to 
                        `physician' is a reference to a physician as 
                        defined in section 1861(r)(1).
                    ``(B) Criteria for designation as medical 
                assistance facility.--A State may designate a facility 
                as a medical assistance facility only if the facility--
                            ``(i) is located in a county (or equivalent 
                        unit of local government)--
                                    ``(I) with fewer than 6 residents 
                                per square mile; or
                                    ``(II) in a rural area (as defined 
                                in section 1886(d)(2)(D)) that is 
                                located more than a 35-mile or 45-
                                minute drive from a hospital, a rural 
                                primary care hospital, or another 
                                facility described in this subsection;
                            ``(ii) at the time such facility applies to 
                        the State for designation as a medical 
                        assistance facility--
                                    ``(I) is a hospital (or in the case 
                                of a facility that closed during the 
                                12-month period that ends on the date 
                                the facility applies for such 
                                designation, at the time the facility 
                                closed), with a participation agreement 
                                in effect under section 1866(a); or
                                    ``(II) is licensed in accordance 
                                with applicable State and local laws 
                                and regulations;
                            ``(iii) meets the requirements of clauses 
                        (iv), (vi), and (vii) of subparagraph (A); and
                            ``(iv) meets the requirements of 
                        subparagraph (I) of paragraph (2) of section 
                        1861(aa).
    ``(e) Rural Health Network Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term `rural health network' means, with respect to a State, an 
organization--
            ``(1) consisting of--
                    ``(A) at least 1 facility that the State has 
                designated or plans to designate as a rural primary 
                care hospital, and
                    ``(B) at least 1 hospital that furnishes services 
                that a rural primary care hospital cannot furnish, and
            ``(2) the members of which have entered into agreements 
        regarding--
                    ``(A) patient referral and transfer,
                    ``(B) the development and use of communications 
                systems, including (where feasible) telemetry systems 
                and systems for electronic sharing of patient data,
                    ``(C) the provision of emergency and non-emergency 
                transportation among the members, and
                    ``(D) credentialing and quality assurance.
    ``(f) Certification by the Secretary.--The Secretary shall certify 
a facility as a rural primary care hospital or medical assistance 
facility (as the case may be) if the facility--
            ``(1) is located in a State that has established a limited 
        service hospital program in accordance with subsection (d);
            ``(2) is designated as a rural primary care hospital or 
        medical assistance facility by the State in which it is 
        located; and
            ``(3) meets such other criteria as the Secretary may 
        require.
    ``(g) Permitting Maintenance of Swing Beds.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to prohibit a State from designating or the 
Secretary from certifying a facility as a rural primary care hospital 
or medical assistance facility solely because, at the time the facility 
applies to the State for designation as a rural primary care hospital 
or medical assistance facility, there is in effect an agreement between 
the facility and the Secretary under section 1883 under which the 
facility's inpatient hospital facilities are used for the furnishing of 
extended care services, except that the number of beds used for the 
furnishing of such services may not exceed the total number of licensed 
inpatient beds at the time the facility applies to the State for such 
designation (minus the number of inpatient beds used for providing 
inpatient care in a rural primary care facility pursuant to subsection 
(d)(2)(A)(vi)). The Secretary may establish additional conditions of 
participation for rural primary care hospitals with a substantial 
number of such beds. For purposes of the first sentence, the number of 
beds of the facility used for the furnishing of extended care services 
shall not include any beds of a unit of the facility that is licensed 
as a distinct-part skilled nursing facility at the time the facility 
applies to the State for designation as a rural primary care hospital 
or medical assistance facility.
    ``(h) Grants.--
            ``(1) Limited service hospital program.--The Secretary may 
        award grants to States that have submitted applications in 
        accordance with subsection (c) for--
                    ``(A) engaging in activities relating to planning 
                and implementing a rural health care plan;
                    ``(B) in the case of a rural primary care hospital 
                program described in subsection (d)(1)(A), engaging in 
                activities relating to planning and implementing rural 
                health networks; and
                    ``(C) designation of facilities as rural primary 
                care hospitals or medical assistance facilities.
            ``(2) Rural emergency medical services.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may award grants 
                to States that have submitted applications in 
                accordance with subparagraph (B) for the establishment 
                or expansion of a program for the provision of rural 
                emergency medical services.
                    ``(B) Application.--An application is in accordance 
                with this subparagraph if the State submits to the 
                Secretary at such time and in such form as the 
                Secretary may require an application containing the 
                assurances described in subparagraphs (A)(ii), 
                (A)(iii), and (B) of subsection (c)(1) and paragraph 
                (3) of such subsection.
    ``(i) Study on Clinically Based Alternative to 96-Hour Rule.--The 
Secretary shall conduct a study on the feasibility of admitting 
patients to rural primary care hospitals and medical assistance 
facilities on a limited DRG basis instead of using the 96-hour average 
length of stay criteria described in subsection (d)(2)(A)(vii).
    ``(j) Waiver of Conflicting Part A Provisions.--The Secretary is 
authorized to waive such provisions of this part and part C as are 
necessary to conduct the program established under this section.
    ``(k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund--
            ``(1) for making grants under subsection (h)(1) to States 
        that have established a rural primary care hospital program in 
        the State under subsection (d)(1)(A), $15,000,000 for each of 
        fiscal years 1993 through 1995; and
            ``(2) for making grants to all States under subsection (h), 
        $25,000,000 in each of the fiscal years 1996 through 1999.''.
    (b) Part A Amendments Relating to Rural Primary Care Hospitals and 
Medical Assistance Facilities.--
            (1) Definitions.--Section 1861 (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended 
        by adding at the end the following new subsection:

  ``medical assistance facility; medical assistance facility services

    ``(oo)(1) The term `medical assistance facility' means a facility 
certified by the Secretary as a medical assistance facility under 
section 1820(f).
    ``(2) The term `medical assistance facility services' means items 
and services, furnished to an inpatient for a medical assistance 
facility by such facility, that would be inpatient hospital services if 
furnished to an inpatient of a hospital by a hospital.''.
            (2) Coverage and payment.--(A)(i) Section 1812(a)(1) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395d(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``inpatient hospital 
        services'' the first place it appears and inserting ``, 
        inpatient hospital services and inpatient medical assistance 
        facility services''; and
            (ii) by striking ``inpatient hospital services'' the second 
        place it appears and inserting ``such services''.
            (B) Section 1814 (42 U.S.C. 1395f) is amended--
                    (i) in subsection (b), by striking ``inpatient 
                rural primary care hospital services,'' and inserting 
                ``inpatient rural primary care hospital services, other 
                than a medical assistance facility providing inpatient 
                medical assistance facility services,''; and
                    (ii) by amending subsection (l) to read as follows:
    ``(l) Payment for Inpatient Rural Primary Care Services and 
Inpatient Medical Assistance Facility Services.--The amount of payment 
under this part for inpatient rural primary care services and inpatient 
medical assistance facility services is the reasonable costs of the 
rural primary care hospital or medical assistance facility in providing 
such services.''.
            (3) Treatment of medical assistance facilities as providers 
        of services.--(A) Section 1861(u) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is 
        amended by inserting ``medical assistance facility,''after 
        ``rural primary care hospital,''.
            (B) The first sentence of section 1864(a) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395aa(a)) is amended by inserting ``a medical assistance 
        facility, as defined in section 1861(oo)(1),'' after 
        ``1861(mm)(1),''.
            (C) The third sentence of section 1865(a) of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1395bb(a)) is amended by striking ``or 1861(mm)(1)'' and 
        inserting ``1861(mm)(1), or 1861(oo)(1),''.
            (4) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1128A(b)(1) (42 
        U.S.C. 1320a-7a(b)(1)) is amended--
                    (i) by striking ``or a rural primary care 
                hospital'' the first place it appears and inserting ``, 
                a rural primary care hospital, or a medical assistance 
                facility''; and
                    (ii) by striking ``or a rural primary care 
                hospital'' the second place it appears and inserting 
                ``, the rural primary care hospital, or the medical 
                assistance facility''.
            (B) Section 1128B(c) (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(c)) is amended by 
        inserting ``medical assistance facility,'' after ``rural 
        primary care hospital,''.
            (C) Section 1134 (42 U.S.C. 1320b-4) is amended by striking 
        ``or rural primary care hospitals'' each place it appears and 
        inserting ``, rural primary care hospitals, or medical 
        assistance facilities''.
            (D) Section 1138(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1320b-8(a)(1)) is 
        amended--
                    (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
                striking ``or rural primary care hospital'' and 
                inserting ``, rural primary care hospital, or medical 
                assistance facility'', and
                    (ii) in the matter preceding clause (i) of 
                subparagraph (A), by striking ``or rural primary care 
                hospital'' and inserting ``, rural primary care 
                hospital, or medical assistance facility''.
            (E) Section 1164(e) (42 U.S.C. 1320c-13(e)) is amended by 
        inserting ``medical assistance facilities,'' after ``rural 
        primary care hospitals,''.
            (F) Section 1816(c)(2)(C) (42 U.S.C. 1395h(c)(2)(C)) is 
        amended by inserting ``medical assistance facility,'' after 
        ``rural primary care hospital,''.
            (G) Section 1833 (42 U.S.C. 1395l) is amended--
                    (i) in subsection (h)(5)(A)(iii)--
                            (I) by striking ``or rural primary care 
                        hospital'' and inserting ``rural primary care 
                        hospital, or medical assistance facility''; and
                            (II) by striking ``to the hospital'' and 
                        inserting ``to the hospital or the facility'';
                    (ii) in subsection (i)(1)(A), by inserting 
                ``medical assistance facility,'' after ``rural primary 
                care hospital,'';
                    (iii) in subsection (i)(3)(A), by striking ``or 
                rural primary care hospital services'' and inserting 
                ``rural primary care hospital services, or medical 
                assistance facility services'';
                    (iv) in subsection (l)(5)(A), by inserting 
                ``medical assistance facility,'' after ``rural primary 
                care hospital,'' each place it appears; and
                    (v) in subsection (l)(5)(C), by striking ``or rural 
                primary care hospital'' each place it appears and 
                inserting ``, rural primary care hospital, or medical 
                assistance facility''.
            (H) Section 1835(c) (42 U.S.C. 1395n(c)) is amended by 
        adding at the end the following: ``A medical assistance 
        facility shall be considered a hospital for purposes of this 
        subsection.''.
            (I) Section 1842(b)(6)(A)(ii) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395u(b)(6)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``medical 
        assistance facility,'' after ``rural primary care hospital,''.
            (J) Section 1861 (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
                    (i) in the last sentence of subsection (e), by 
                striking ``1861(mm)(1))'' and inserting ``1861(mm)(1)) 
                or a medical assistance facility (as defined in section 
                1861(oo)(1)).'',
                    (ii) in subsection (w)(1) by inserting ``medical 
                assistance facility,'' after ``rural primary care 
                hospital,'', and
                    (iii) in subsection (w)(2), by striking ``or rural 
                primary care hospital'' each place it appears and 
                inserting ``, rural primary care hospital, or medical 
                assistance facility''.
            (K) Section 1862(a)(14) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(14)) is amended 
        by striking ``or rural primary care hospital'' each place it 
        appears and inserting ``, rural primary care hospital, or 
        medical assistance facility''.
            (L) Section 1866(a)(1) (42 U.S.C 1395cc(a)(1)) is amended--
                    (i) in subparagraph (F)(ii), by inserting ``medical 
                assistance facilities,'' after ``rural primary care 
                hospitals,'';
                    (ii) in subparagraph (H)--
                            (I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
                        inserting ``and in the case of medical 
                        assistance facilities which provide inpatient 
                        medical assistance facility services'' after 
                        ``rural primary care hospital services''; and
                            (II) in clauses (i) and (ii), by striking 
                        ``hospital'' each place it appears and 
                        inserting ``hospital or facility'';
                    (iii) in subparagraph (I)--
                            (I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
                        striking ``or rural primary care hospital'' and 
                        inserting ``, a rural primary care hospital, or 
                        a medical assistance facility''; and
                            (II) in clause (ii), by striking ``the 
                        hospital'' and inserting ``the hospital or the 
                        facility''; and
                    (iv) in subparagraph (N)--
                            (I) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
                        striking ``and rural primary hospitals'' and 
                        inserting ``, rural primary care hospitals, and 
                        medical assistance facilities'';
                            (II) in clause (i), by striking ``or rural 
                        primary care hospital,'' and inserting ``, 
                        rural primary care hospital, or medical 
                        assistance facility,''; and
                            (III) in clause (ii), by striking 
                        ``hospital'' and inserting ``hospital or 
                        facility''.
            (M) Section 1866(a)(3) (42 U.S.C 1395cc(a)(3)) is amended--
                    (i) by striking ``rural primary care hospital,'' 
                each place it appears in subparagraphs (A) and (B) and 
                inserting ``rural primary care hospital, medical 
                assistance facility,'', and
                    (ii) in subparagraph (C)(ii)(II), by striking 
                ``rural primary care hospitals,'' each place it appears 
                and inserting ``rural primary care hospitals, medical 
                assistance facilities''.
            (N) Section 1867(e)(5) (42 U.S.C. 1395dd(e)(5)) is amended 
        by striking ``1861(mm)(1))'' and inserting ``1861(mm)(1)) or a 
        medical assistance facility (as defined in section 
        1861(oo)(1)).''.
    (c) Part B Amendments Relating to Rural Primary Care Hospitals and 
Medical Assistance Facilities.--
            (1) Coverage.--(A) Section 1861(oo) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(oo)) 
        as added by subsection (b)(1), is amended by adding at the end 
        the following new paragraph:
    ``(3) The term `outpatient medical assistance facility services' 
means medical and other health services furnished by a medical 
assistance facility on an outpatient basis.''.
            (B) Section 1832(a)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395k(a)(2)) is amended--
                    (i) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``and'' at the 
                end;
                    (ii) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period at 
                the end and inserting ``; and''; and
                    (iii) by adding at the end the following new 
                subparagraph:
                    ``(K) outpatient medical assistance facility 
                services (as defined in section 1861(oo)(3)).''.
            (2) Payment.--(A) Section 1833(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)) is 
        amended--
                    (i) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding 
                subparagraph (A), by striking ``and (I)'' and inserting 
                ``(I), and (K)'';
                    (ii) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the 
                end;
                    (iii) in paragraph (7), by striking the period at 
                the end and inserting ``; and''; and
                    (iv) by adding at the end the following new 
                paragraph:
            ``(8) in the case of outpatient medical assistance facility 
        services, the amounts described in section 1834(g).''.
            (B) Section 1834(g) (42 U.S.C. 1395m(g)) is amended--
                    (i) in the subsection heading by inserting ``and 
                Outpatient Medical Assistance Facility Services'' after 
                ``Services'';
                    (ii) in paragraph (1), by striking ``provided 
                during a year before 1993 in a rural primary care 
                hospital under this part shall be determined by one of 
                the following methods as elected by the rural primary 
                care hospital'' and inserting ``in a rural primary care 
                hospital or medical assistance facility under this part 
                shall be determined by one of the following methods as 
                elected by the rural primary care hospital or medical 
                assistance facility'';
                    (iii) in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), by striking 
                ``outpatient rural primary care hospital services'' 
                each place it appears and inserting ``outpatient rural 
                primary care hospital services or outpatient medical 
                assistance facility services''; and
                    (iv) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``hospital'' 
                and inserting ``hospital or facility''.
    (d) Payment Continued to Designated EACHs.--
            (1) Termination of each designation.--Section 1820(i)(1)(A) 
        (42 U.S.C. 1395l(4)(i)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting at the 
        end the following new flush sentence:
        ``The Secretary shall not designate any hospital as an 
        essential access community hospital on or after July 1, 
        1994.''.
            (2) Permitting payment to prior designated eachs.--Section 
        1886(d)(5)(D) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(5)(D)) is amended--
                    (A) in clause (iii)(III), by inserting ``as such 
                section was in effect as of July 1, 1994'' before the 
                period at the end; and
                    (B) in clause (v), by inserting ``as such section 
                was in effect as of July 1, 1994'' after 
                ``1820(i)(1).''
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall take effect on July 1, 1994.
    (e) Technical Amendment Relating to Part A Deductible, Coinsurance 
and Spell of Illness.--(1) Section 1812(a)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1395d(a)(1)), 
as amended by subsection (b)(2)(A), is amended--
            (A) by striking ``inpatient medical assistance facility 
        services'' and inserting ``inpatient medical assistance 
        facility services, inpatient rural primary care hospital 
        services, or inpatient medical assistance facility services''; 
        and
            (B) by striking ``and inpatient rural primary care hospital 
        services''.
    (2) Sections 1813(a) and 1813(b)(3)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395e(a), 
1395e(b)(3)(A)) are each amended by striking ``inpatient hospital 
services'' each place it appears and inserting ``inpatient hospital 
services, inpatient rural primary care hospital services, or inpatient 
medical assistance facility services,''.
    (3) Section 1813(b)(3)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1395e(b)(3)(B)) is amended by 
striking ``inpatient hospital services'' and inserting ``inpatient 
hospital services, inpatient rural primary care hospital services, 
inpatient medical assistance facility services,''.
    (4) Section 1861(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(a)) is amended--
            (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``inpatient hospital 
        services'' and inserting ``inpatient hospital services, 
        inpatient rural primary care hospital services, inpatient 
        medical assistance facility services,''; and
            (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``hospital'' and 
        inserting ``hospital, rural primary care hospital, or medical 
        assistance facility''.
    (f) Repeal of Development of PPS System For Inpatient Rural Primary 
Care Hospital Services.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1814(l) (42 U.S.C. 1395f(l)) is 
        amended by striking paragraph (2).
            (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 1814(l)(1) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395F(l)(1)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``(l)(1)'' and inserting ``(l)'';
                    (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as 
                paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively;
                    (C) in paragraph (2), as redesignated, by striking 
                ``paragraph'' and inserting ``subsection''; and
                    (D) in the last sentence, by striking ``paragraph'' 
                and inserting ``subsection''.
    (g) Repeal of Development and Implementation of All Inclusive PPS 
System for Outpatient Rural Primary Care Services.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1834(g) (42 U.S.C. 1395m(g)), as 
        amended by subsection (c)(2)(B), is amended by striking 
        paragraph (2).
            (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 1834(g)(1) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395m(g)(1)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``(1) In general.--''
                    (B) by redesignating subparagraph (A) and clauses 
                (i) and (ii) of such subparagraph as paragraph (1) and 
                subparagraphs (A) and (B) of such paragraph, 
                respectively;
                    (C) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as paragraph 
                (2);
                    (D) in paragraph (1)(A), as redesignated, by 
                striking ``subparagraph (B)''; and
                    (E) in paragraph (1)(B), as so redesignated, by 
                striking ``subparagraph'' and inserting ``paragraph''.
    (h) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided, the amendments 
made by this section shall apply to services furnished on or after 
October 1, 1994.

SEC. 4112. SUBACUTE CARE STUDY.

    (a) Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall--
            (1) define the level and type of care that should 
        constitute subacute care;
            (2) determine the appropriateness of furnishing subacute 
        care in different settings by evaluating the quality of care 
        and patient outcomes;
            (3) determine the cost and effectiveness of providing 
        subacute care under the medicare program under title XVIII of 
        such Act to individuals who are eligible for benefits under 
        part A of such title;
            (4) determine the extent to which hospital DRG prospective 
        payment rates under section 1886(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1395ww(d)) are appropriate for the less restrictive 
        institutional settings that provide subacute care; and
            (5) study the relationships between institutions and their 
        payment methodologies in order to develop ways in which to 
        maximize the continuity of care for each patient episode in 
        which subacute care is furnished.
    (b) Report.--Not later than October 1, 1996, the Secretary shall 
submit to the Congress a report on the matters studied under subsection 
(a).

                 PART 3--PROVISIONS RELATING TO PART B

SEC. 4201. UPDATES FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES.

    Section 1848(d)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(d)(1)) is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting after ``subparagraph 
        (B)'' the following: ``and, in the case of 1995, specified in 
        subparagraph (C)'';
            (2) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D); 
        and
            (3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new 
        subparagraph:
                    ``(C) Special provision for 1995.--For purposes of 
                subparagraph (A), the conversion factor specified in 
                this subparagraph for 1995 is--
                            ``(i) in the case of physicians' services 
                        included in the category of primary care 
                        services (as defined for purposes of subsection 
                        (j)(1)), the conversion factor established 
                        under this subsection for 1994 reduced by 1 
                        percent and adjusted by the update established 
                        under paragraph (3) for 1995; and
                            ``(ii) in the case of any other physicians' 
                        services, the conversion factor established 
                        under this subsection for 1994 reduced by 4.0 
                        percent and adjusted by the update established 
                        under paragraph (3) for 1995.''.

SEC. 4202. SUBSTITUTION OF REAL GDP TO ADJUST FOR VOLUME AND INTENSITY; 
              REPEAL OF RESTRICTION ON MAXIMUM REDUCTION PERMITTED IN 
              DEFAULT UPDATE.

    (a) Use of Real GDP To Adjust for Volume and Intensity.--Section 
1848(f)(2)(A)(iii) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(f)(2)(A)(iii)) is amended to read 
as follows:
                            ``(iii) 1 plus the average per capita 
                        growth in the real gross domestic product 
                        (divided by 100) for the 5-fiscal-year period 
                        ending with the previous fiscal year (increased 
                        by 1.5 percentage points for the category of 
                        services consisting of primary care services), 
                        and''.
    (b) Repeal of Restriction on Maximum Reduction.--Section 
1848(d)(3)(B)(ii) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(d)(3)(B)(ii)) is amended--
            (1) in the heading, by inserting ``in certain years'' after 
        ``adjustment'';
            (2) in the matter preceding subclause (I), by striking 
        ``for a year'';
            (3) in subclause (I), by adding ``and'' at the end;
            (4) in subclause (II), by striking ``, and'' and inserting 
        a period; and
            (5) by striking subclause (III).
    (c) Repeal of Performance Standard Factor.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1848(f)(2) is amended by striking 
        subparagraph (B) and redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
        subparagraph (B).
            (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1848(f)(2)(A) is amended 
        in the matter following clause (iv) by striking ``1, multiplied 
        by 100'' and all that follows through ``subparagraph (B))'' and 
        inserting ``1 and multiplied by 100''.
    (d) Effective Date.--
            (1) Volume performance standards.--The amendments made by 
        subsections (a) and (c) shall apply with respect to volume 
        performance standards established beginning with fiscal year 
        1995.
            (2) Repeal of restriction on maximum reduction.--The 
        amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply to services 
        furnished on or after January 1, 1997.

SEC. 4203. PAYMENT FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES RELATING TO INPATIENT STAYS 
              IN CERTAIN HOSPITALS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Limitations described.--Part B of title XVIII (42 
        U.S.C. 1831 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1848 
        the following new section:

``limitations on payment for physicians' services relating to inpatient 
                       stays in certain hospitals

    ``Sec. 1849. (a) Definitions.--In this section, the following 
definitions apply:
            ``(1) Hospital.--The term `hospital' means a subsection (d) 
        hospital as defined in section 1886(d)(1)(B).
            ``(2) Medical staff.--An individual furnishing a 
        physician's service is considered to be on the medical staff of 
        a hospital--
                    ``(A) if (in accordance with requirements for 
                hospitals established by the Joint Commission on 
                Accreditation of Health Organizations)--
                            ``(i) the individual is subject to bylaws, 
                        rules, and regulations established by the 
                        hospital to provide a framework for the self-
                        governance of medical staff activities;
                            ``(ii) subject to such bylaws, rules, and 
                        regulations, the individual has clinical 
                        privileges granted by the hospital's governing 
                        body; and
                            ``(iii) under such clinical privileges, the 
                        individual may provide physicians' services 
                        independently within the scope of the 
                        individual's clinical privileges, or
                    ``(B) if such physician provides at least one 
                service to a medicare beneficiary in such hospital.
            ``(3) Rural area; urban area.--The terms `rural area' and 
        `urban area' have the meaning given such terms under section 
        1886(d)(2)(D).
            ``(4) Teaching hospital.--The term `teaching hospital' 
        means a hospital which has a teaching program approved as 
        specified in section 1861(b)(6).
    ``(b) Services Subject to Reduction.--
            ``(1) Determination of hospital-specific per admission 
        relative value.--Not later than October 1 of each year 
        (beginning with 1997), the Secretary shall determine for each 
        hospital--
                    ``(A) the hospital-specific per admission relative 
                value under subsection (c)(2) for the following year; 
                and
                    ``(B) whether such hospital-specific relative value 
                is projected to exceed the allowable average per 
                admission relative value applicable to the hospital for 
                the following year under subsection (c)(1).
            ``(2) Reduction for services at hospitals exceeding 
        allowable average per admission relative value.--If the 
        Secretary determines (under paragraph (1)) that a medical 
        staff's hospital-specific per admission relative value for a 
        year (beginning with 1998) is projected to exceed the allowable 
        average per admission relative value applicable to the medical 
        staff for the year, the Secretary shall reduce (in accordance 
        with subsection (d)) the amount of payment otherwise determined 
        under this part for each physician's service furnished during 
        the year to an inpatient of the hospital by an individual who 
        is a member of the hospital's medical staff.
            ``(3) Timing of determination; notice to hospitals and 
        carriers.--Not later than October 1 of each year (beginning 
        with 1997), the Secretary shall notify the medical executive 
        committee of each hospital (as set forth in the Standards of 
        the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Health 
        Organizations) of the determinations made with respect to the 
        medical staff of such hospital under paragraph (1).
    ``(c) Determination of Allowable Average per Admission Relative 
Value and Hospital-Specific per Admission Relative Values.--
            ``(1) Allowable average per admission relative value.--
                    ``(A) Urban hospitals.--In the case of a hospital 
                located in an urban area, the allowable average per 
                admission relative value established under this 
                subsection for a year is equal to 125 percent (or 120 
                percent for years after 1999) of the median of 1996 
                hospital-specific per admission relative values 
                determined under paragraph (2) for all hospital medical 
                staffs.
                    ``(B) Rural hospitals.--In the case of a hospital 
                located in a rural area, the allowable average per 
                admission relative value established under this 
                subsection for 1998 and each succeeding year, is equal 
                to 140 percent of the median of the 1996 hospital-
                specific per admission relative values determined under 
                paragraph (2) for all hospital medical staffs.
            ``(2) Hospital-specific per admission relative value.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The hospital-specific per 
                admission relative value projected for a hospital 
                (other than a teaching hospital) for a calendar year 
                shall be equal to the average per admission relative 
                value (as determined under section 1848(c)(2)) for 
                physicians' services furnished to inpatients of the 
                hospital by the hospital's medical staff (excluding 
                interns and residents) during the second year preceding 
                such calendar year, adjusted for variations in case-mix 
                and disproportionate share status among hospitals (as 
                determined by the Secretary under subparagraph (C)).
                    ``(B) Special rule for teaching hospitals.--The 
                hospital-specific per admission relative value 
                projected for a teaching hospital in a calendar year 
                shall be equal to the sum of--
                            ``(i) the average per admission relative 
                        value (as determined under section 1848(c)(2)) 
                        for physicians' services furnished to 
                        inpatients of the hospital by the hospital's 
                        medical staff (excluding interns and residents) 
                        during the second year preceding such calendar 
                        year adjusted for variations in case-mix, 
                        disproportionate share status, and teaching 
                        status among hospitals (as determined by the 
                        Secretary under subparagraph (C)); and
                            ``(ii) the equivalent per admission 
                        relative value (as determined under section 
                        1848(c)(2)) for physicians' services furnished 
                        to inpatients of the hospital by interns and 
                        residents of the hospital during the second 
                        calendar year preceding such calendar year, 
                        adjusted for variations in case-mix, 
                        disproportionate share status, and teaching 
                        status among hospitals (as determined by the 
                        Secretary under subparagraph (C)). The 
                        Secretary shall determine such equivalent 
                        relative value unit per admission for interns 
                        and residents based on the best available data 
                        for teaching hospitals and may make such 
                        adjustment in the aggregate.
                    ``(C) Adjustment for teaching and disproportionate 
                share hospitals.--The Secretary shall adjust the 
                allowable per admission relative values otherwise 
                determined under this paragraph to take into account 
                the needs of teaching hospitals and hospitals receiving 
                additional payments under subparagraphs (F) and (G) of 
                section 1886(d)(5). The adjustment for teaching status 
                or disproportionate share shall not be less than zero.
    ``(d) Amount of Reduction.--The amount of payment otherwise made 
under this part for a physician's service that is subject to a 
reduction under subsection (b) during a year shall be reduced by 15 
percent, in the case of a service furnished by a member of the medical 
staff of the hospital for which the Secretary determines under 
subsection (b)(1) that the hospital medical staff's projected relative 
value per admission exceeds the allowable average per admission 
relative value.
    ``(e) Reconciliation of Reductions Based on Hospital-Specific 
Relative Value per Admission With Actual Relative Values.--
            ``(1) Determination of actual average per admission 
        relative value.--Not later than October 1 of each year 
        (beginning with 1999), the Secretary shall determine the actual 
        average per admission relative value (as determined pursuant to 
        section 1848(c)(2)) for the physicians' services furnished by 
        members of a hospital's medical staff to inpatients of the 
        hospital during the previous year, on the basis of claims for 
        payment for such services that are submitted to the Secretary 
        not later than 90 days after the last day of such previous 
        year. The actual average per admission relative value shall be 
        adjusted by the appropriate case-mix, disproportionate share 
        factor, and teaching factor for the hospital medical staff (as 
        determined by the Secretary under subsection (c)(2)(C)).
            ``(2) Reconciliation with reductions taken.--
                    ``(A) Reimbursement.--In the case of a hospital for 
                which the payment amounts for physicians' services 
                furnished by members of the hospital's medical staff to 
                inpatients of the hospital were reduced under this 
                section for a year--
                            ``(i) if the actual average per admission 
                        relative value for such hospital's medical 
                        staff during the year (as determined by the 
                        Secretary under paragraph (1)) did not exceed 
                        the allowable average per admission relative 
                        value applicable to the hospital's medical 
                        staff under subsection (c)(1) for the year, the 
                        Secretary shall reimburse the fiduciary agent 
                        for the medical staff by the amount by which 
                        payments for such services were reduced for the 
                        year under subsection (d), including interest 
                        at an appropriate rate determined by the 
                        Secretary; and
                            ``(ii) if the actual average per admission 
                        relative value for such hospital's medical 
                        staff during the year (as determined by the 
                        Secretary under paragraph (1)) exceeded the 
                        allowable average per admission relative value 
                        applicable to the hospital's medical staff 
                        under subsection (c)(1) for the year, the 
                        Secretary shall reimburse the fiduciary agent 
                        for the medical staff, as a percent of the 
                        total amount of payment otherwise determined 
                        under this part for physicians' services 
                        furnished during the year to inpatients of the 
                        hospital by the hospital's medical staff (prior 
                        to the reduction under subsection (d)), the 
                        difference between 15 percentage points and the 
                        actual number of percentage points that the 
                        medical staff exceeded the allowable average 
                        per admission relative value, including 
                        interest at any appropriate rate determined by 
                        the Secretary.
                    ``(B) No reimbursement.--The Secretary shall not 
                pay the fiduciary agent for the medical staff of a 
                hospital any amounts by which payments for physicians' 
                services provided by the medical staff were reduced for 
                a year under this section if the actual average per 
                admission relative value for such hospital's medical 
                staff during the year (as determined by the Secretary 
                under paragraph (1)) exceeded the allowable average per 
                admission relative value applicable to the hospital's 
                medical staff under subsection (c)(1) for the year by 
                15 percentage points or more.
            ``(3) Medical executive committee of a hospital.--Each 
        medical executive committee of a hospital whose medical staff 
        is projected to exceed the allowable relative value per 
        admission for a year, shall have 1 year from the date of 
        notification that such medical staff is projected to exceed the 
        allowable relative value per admission to designate a fiduciary 
        agent for the medical staff to receive and disburse any 
        appropriate amounts withheld made by the carrier.
            ``(4) Alternative reimbursement to members of staff.--At 
        the request of a fiduciary agent for the medical staff, if the 
        fiduciary agent for the medical staff is owed the reimbursement 
        described in paragraph (2)(A)(ii) for excess reductions in 
        payments during a year, the Secretary shall make such 
        reimbursement to the members of the hospital's medical staff, 
        on a pro-rata basis according to the proportion of physicians' 
        services furnished to inpatients of the hospital during the 
        year that were furnished by each member of the medical staff.
    ``(f) Claims To Be Submitted Not Later Than 90 Days After End of 
Year.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no payment may be 
made under this part for any physician's service furnished by a member 
of the medical staff of a hospital to an inpatient of the hospital 
during a year unless the hospital submits a claim to the Secretary for 
the payment for such service not later than 90 days after the last day 
of the year.''.
            (2) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1833(a)(1)(N) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)(N)) is amended by inserting ``(subject to 
        reduction under section 1849)'' after ``1848(a)(1)''.
            (B) Section 1848(a)(1)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(a)(1)(B)) is 
        amended by striking ``this subsection,'' and inserting ``this 
        subsection and section 1849,''.
    (b) Requiring Physicians To Identify Hospital at Which Service 
Furnished.--Section 1848(g)(4)(A)(i) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(g)(4)(A)(i)) is 
amended by striking ``beneficiary,'' and inserting ``beneficiary (and, 
in the case of a service furnished to an inpatient of a hospital, 
report the hospital identification number on such claim form),''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 1998.

SEC. 4204. CHANGES IN UNDERSERVED AREA BONUS PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1833(m) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(m)) is amended--
            (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(m)'',
            (2) by inserting ``described in paragraph (2)'' after 
        ``physicians' services'',
            (3) by striking ``10 percent'' and inserting ``the 
        applicable percent'',
            (4) by striking ``service'' the last place it appears and 
        inserting ``services'', and
            (5) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
    ``(2)(A) The applicable percent referred to in paragraph (1) is 20 
percent in the case of primary care services, as defined in section 
1842(i)(4), and 10 percent for services other than primary care 
services furnished in health professional shortage areas located in 
rural areas as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D).
    ``(B) The Secretary shall reduce payments for all services (other 
than primary care services) for which payment may be made under this 
section by such percentage as the Secretary determines necessary so 
that, beginning on the date of the enactment of the Health Security 
Act, the amendments made by section 4204(e) of such Act would not 
result in expenditures under this section that exceed the amount of 
such expenditures that would have been made if such amendment had not 
been made.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) are 
effective for services furnished on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4205. CORRECTION OF MVPS UPWARD BIAS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1848(f)(2)(A)(iv) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
4(f)(2)(A)(iv)) is amended by striking ``including changes in law and 
regulations affecting the percentage increase described in clause (i)'' 
and inserting ``excluding anticipated responses to such changes''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to performance standard rates of increase determined 
for fiscal year 1995 and succeeding fiscal years.

SEC. 4206. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR MEDICARE STATE-BASED PERFORMANCE 
              STANDARD RATE OF INCREASE.

    Section 1848(f) (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(f)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
            ``(6) State-based performance standard rates of increase 
        demonstration projects.--The Secretary shall establish 
        demonstration projects in not more than 3 States under which a 
        State elects State-based performance standard rates of increase 
        to substitute for the national performance standard rates of 
        increase established for the year under paragraph (2). The 
        Secretary shall develop criteria for the establishment of such 
        demonstration projects which shall include the requirement of 
        budget-neutrality for payments made under this part with 
        respect to physicians' services furnished in a State 
        participating in the demonstration project.''.

SEC. 4207. ELIMINATION OF FORMULA-DRIVEN OVERPAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN 
              OUTPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES.

    (a) Ambulatory Surgical Center Procedures.--Section 
1833(i)(3)(B)(i)(II) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(i)(3)(B)(i)(II)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``of 80 percent''; and
            (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting the 
        following: ``, less the amount a provider may charge as 
        described in clause (ii) of section 1866(a)(2)(A).''.
    (b) Radiology Services and Diagnostic Procedures.--Section 
1833(n)(1)(B)(i)(II) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(n)(1)(B)(i)(II)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``of 80 percent''; and
            (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting the 
        following: ``, less the amount a provider may charge as 
        described in clause (ii) of section 1866(a)(2)(A).''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished during portions of cost reporting periods 
occurring on or after July 1, 1994.

SEC. 4208. EYE OR EYE AND EAR HOSPITALS.

    Section 1833(i)(4)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(i)(4)(A)) is amended in the 
matter following clause (iii) by striking ``January 1, 1995'' and 
inserting ``September 30, 1997''.

SEC. 4209. IMPOSITION OF COINSURANCE ON LABORATORY SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Paragraphs (1)(D) and (2)(D) of section 1833(a) 
(42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)) are each amended--
            (1) by striking ``(or 100 percent'' and all that follows 
        through ``the first opinion))''; and
            (2) by striking ``100 percent of such negotiated rate'' and 
        inserting ``80 percent of such negotiated rate''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to tests furnished on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4210. APPLICATION OF COMPETITIVE ACQUISITION PROCESS FOR PART B 
              ITEMS AND SERVICES.

    (a) General Rule.--Part B of title XVIII is amended by inserting 
after section 1846 the following:

            ``competition acquisition for items and services

    ``Sec. 1847. (a) Establishment of Bidding Areas.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish 
        competitive acquisition areas for the purpose of awarding a 
        contract or contracts for the furnishing under this part of the 
        items and services described in subsection (c) on or after 
        January 1, 1995. The Secretary may establish different 
        competitive acquisition areas under this subsection for 
        different classes of items and services under this part.
            ``(2) Criteria for establishment.--The competitive 
        acquisition areas established under paragraph (1) shall--
                    ``(A) initially be, or be within, metropolitan 
                statistical areas; and
                    ``(B) be chosen based on the availability and 
                accessibility of suppliers and the probable savings to 
                be realized by the use of competitive bidding in the 
                furnishing of items and services in the area.
    ``(b) Awarding of Contracts in Areas.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct a 
        competition among individuals and entities supplying items and 
        services under this part for each competitive acquisition area 
        established under subsection (a) for each class of items and 
        services.
            ``(2) Conditions for awarding contract.--The Secretary may 
        not award a contract to any individual or entity under the 
        competition conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) to furnish an 
        item or service under this part unless the Secretary finds that 
        the individual or entity meets quality standards specified by 
        the Secretary for the furnishing of such item or service.
            ``(3) Contents of contract.--A contract entered into with 
        an individual or entity under the competition conducted 
        pursuant to paragraph (1) shall specify (for all of the items 
        and services within a class)--
                    ``(A) the quantity of items and services the entity 
                shall provide; and
                    ``(B) such other terms and conditions as the 
                Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Services Described.--The items and services to which the 
provisions of this section shall apply are as follows:
            ``(1) Magnetic resonance imaging tests and computerized 
        axial tomography scans, including a physician's interpretation 
        of the results of such tests and scans.
            ``(2) Enteral and parenteral nutrients and supplies.''.
    (b) Items and Services To Be Furnished Only Through Competitive 
Acquisition.--Section 1862(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (15);
            (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (16) and 
        inserting ``; or''; and
            (3) by inserting after paragraph (16) the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(17) where such expenses are for an item or service 
        furnished in a competitive acquisition area (as established by 
        the Secretary under section 1847(a)) by an individual or entity 
        other than the supplier with whom the Secretary has entered 
        into a contract under section 1847(b) for the furnishing of 
        such item or service in that area, unless the Secretary finds 
        that such expenses were incurred in a case of urgent need.''.
    (c) Reduction in Payment Amounts if Competitive Acquisition Fails 
To Achieve Minimum Reduction in Payments.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, if the 
establishment of competitive acquisition areas under section 1847 of 
such Act (as added by subsection (a)) and the limitation of coverage 
for items and services under part B of such title to items and services 
furnished by providers with competitive acquisition contracts under 
such section during 1996 does not result in a reduction of at least 10 
percent in the projected payment amount that would have applied to the 
items or services under part B if the items or services had not been 
furnished through competitive acquisition under such section in such 
year, the Secretary shall reduce for such year the payment amount for 
all such services by such percentage as the Secretary determines 
necessary to result in such a reduction for such year.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to items and services furnished under part B of title XVIII of 
the Social Security Act on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4211. APPLICATION OF COMPETITIVE ACQUISITION PROCEDURES FOR 
              LABORATORY SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1847(c), as added by section 4210, is 
amended by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
            ``(3) Clinical diagnostic laboratory tests.''.
    (b) Reduction in Fee Schedule Amounts if Competitive Acquisition 
Fails To Achieve Savings.--Section 1833(h) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(h)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
    ``(7) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, if 
the Secretary applies the authority provided under section 1847 to 
establish competitive acquisition areas for the furnishing of clinical 
diagnostic laboratory tests during 1996 and the application of such 
authority does not result in a reduction of at least 10 percent in the 
projected payment amount that would have applied to such tests under 
this section in such year if the tests had not been furnished through 
competitive acquisition under section 1847, the Secretary shall reduce 
for such year each payment amount for all such tests otherwise 
determined under the fee schedules and negotiated rates established 
under this subsection by such percentage as the Secretary determines 
necessary to result in such a reduction for such year.''.

SEC. 4212. EXPANDED COVERAGE FOR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS AND NURSE 
              PRACTITIONERS.

    (a) Coverage in Outpatient Settings.--Section 1861(s)(2)(K) (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(K)) is amended--
            (1) in clause (i)--
                    (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
                (II); and
                    (B) by inserting ``or (IV) in an outpatient setting 
                as defined by the Secretary'' following ``shortage 
                area,''; and
            (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``section 1919(a)'' and 
        inserting ``section 1919(a) or in an outpatient setting as 
        defined by the Secretary''.
    (b) Payment Based on Physician Fee Schedule.--
            (1) Section 1833(a)(1)(O) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)(O)) is 
        amended--
                    (A) by striking ``section 1861(s)(2)(K)(iii) 
                (relating to nurse practitioner and clinical nurse 
                specialist services provided in a rural area)'' and 
                inserting ``section 1861(s)(2)(K)'';
                    (B) by striking ``for services furnished on or 
                after January 1, 1992,'' and inserting ``for services 
                described in section 1861(s)(2)(K)(iii) furnished on or 
                after January 1, 1992, and for services described in 
                clauses (i), (ii), and (iv) of section 1861(s)(2)(K) 
                furnished on or after January 1, 1997,''; and
                    (C) by striking ``subsection (r)(2)'' and inserting 
                ``subsection (r)(2) or subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
                section 1842(b)(12)''.
            (2) Section 1842(b)(12)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(12)(A)) is 
        amended--
                    (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i);
                    (B) in clause (ii)(II), by inserting ``and before 
                January 1, 1997,'' after ``January 1, 1992,'';
                    (C) by striking the period at the end of clause 
                (ii)(II) and inserting ``; and''; and
                    (D) by inserting at the end the following clause:
                            ``(iii) in the case of services furnished 
                        on or after January 1, 1997--
                                    ``(I) in the case of services 
                                performed as an assistant at surgery, 
                                65 percent of the amount that would 
                                otherwise be recognized if performed by 
                                a physician who is serving as an 
                                assistant at surgery, and
                                    ``(II) in the case of other 
                                services, 85 percent of the fee 
                                schedule amount provided under section 
                                1848.''.
    (c) Rural Nurse Practitioners as Assistants at Surgery in Urban 
Areas.--Section 1861(s)(2)(K)(ii) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(K)(ii)), as 
amended by subsection (a)(2), is further amended by adding ``or 
services as an assistant at surgery furnished by a nurse practitioner 
whose primary practice location (as defined by the Secretary) is in a 
rural area (as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)) to an individual who 
resides in a rural area when the service is furnished to such 
individual in an urban area by such practitioner when such practitioner 
refers such individual to an urban area for the furnishing of 
services'' after ``as defined by the Secretary''.
    (d) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Section 1861(b)(4) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(b)(4)) is amended 
        by striking ``subsection (s)(2)(K)(i)'' and inserting 
        ``subsection (s)(2)(K)''.
            (2) Section 1862(a)(14) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(14)), as 
        amended by section4108(b)(4)(K), is amended by striking 
        ``section 1861(s)(2)(K)(i)'' and inserting ``section 
        1861(s)(2)(K)''.
            (3) Section 1866(a)(1)(H) (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(1)(H)), as 
        amended by section 4108(b)(4)(L)(ii), is further amended by 
        striking ``section 1861(s)(2)(K)(i)'' and inserting ``section 
        1861(s)(2)(K)''.
    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 1997.

SEC. 4213. ELIMINATION OF BALANCE BILLING.

    Effective January 1, 1996, notwithstanding any provision of title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), a 
nonparticipating physician, or nonparticipating supplier or other 
person (as such terms are defined in section 1842(i)(2) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395u(i)(2)) may not receive payment for services or items under 
such title.

SEC. 4214. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOURCE-BASED METHODOLOGY 
              FOR PRACTICE EXPENSES.

    (a) Development.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        shall develop a methodology for implementing in 1997 a 
        resource-based system for determining practice expense relative 
        value units for each physician's service. The methodology 
        utilized shall recognize the staff, equipment, and supplies 
        used in the provision of various medical and surgical services 
        in various settings.
            (2) Report.--The Secretary shall transmit a report by 
        January 1, 1996, on the methodology developed under paragraph 
        (1) to the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on 
        Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the 
        Committee on Finance of the Senate. The report shall include a 
        presentation of data utilized in developing the methodology and 
        an explanation of the methodology.
    (b) Implementation.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1848(c)(2)(C)(ii) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395w-4(c)(2)(C)(ii)) is amended--
                    (A) by inserting ``for the service for years before 
                1997'' before ``equal to'',
                    (B) by striking the period at the end of subclause 
                (II) and inserting a comma, and
                    (C) by adding after and below subclause (II) the 
                following:
                        ``and for years beginning with 1997 based on 
                        the relative practice expense resources 
                        involved in furnishing the service.''.
            (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 1848(c)(3)(C)(ii) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395w-4(c)(3)(C)(ii)) is amended by striking ``The 
        practice'' and inserting ``For years before 1997, the 
        practice''.
            (3) Application of certain provisions.--In implementing the 
        amendment made by paragraph (1)(C), the provisions of clauses 
        (ii)(II) and (iii) of section 1848(c)(2)(B) of the Social 
        Security Act shall apply in the same manner as they apply to 
        adjustments under clause (ii)(I) of such section.

SEC. 4215. PAYMENTS FOR DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.

    (a) In General.--Subparagraph (B) of section 1834(a)(14) (42 U.S.C. 
1395m(a)(14)) is amended by striking the period at the end and 
inserting ``, except that such percentage increase shall--
                            ``(i) be reduced by 2 percentage points for 
                        each of years 1995 and 1996;
                            ``(ii) be reduced by 1.5 percentage points 
                        for 1997;
                            ``(iii) be reduced by 2 percentage points 
                        for 1998; and
                            ``(iv) be reduced by 1 percentage points 
                        for 1999.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall be 
effective on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4216. GENERAL PART B PREMIUM.

    Section 1839(e) (42 U.S.C. 1395r(e)) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``and prior to January 
        1999''; and
            (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``prior to January 
        1998''.

              PART 4--PROVISIONS RELATING TO PARTS A AND B

SEC. 4301. MEDICARE SECONDARY PAYER CHANGES.

    (a) Extension of Data Match.--
            (1) Section 1862(b)(5)(C) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(5)(C)) is 
        amended by striking clause (iii).
            (2) Section 6103(l)(12) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
        1986 is amended by striking subparagraph (F).
    (b) Repeal of Sunset on Application to Disabled Employees of 
Employers With More Than 100 Employees.--Section 1862(b)(1)(B)(iii) (42 
U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(B)(iii)) is amended--
            (1) in the heading, by striking ``Sunset'' and inserting 
        ``Effective date''; and
            (2) by striking ``, and before October 1, 1998''.
    (c) Extension of Period for End Stage Renal Disease 
Beneficiaries.--Section 1862(b)(1)(C) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(C)) is 
amended in the second sentence by striking ``and on or before October 
1, 1998,''.

SEC. 4302. INCREASE IN MEDICARE SECONDARY PAYER COVERAGE FOR END STAGE 
              RENAL DISEASE SERVICES TO 24 MONTHS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1862(b)(1)(C) (42 U.S.C. 1395y(b)(1)(C)), 
as amended by section 4301(c), is amended by striking the last sentence 
and inserting: ``Effective for items and services furnished on or after 
January 1, 1996 (with respect to periods beginning on or after July 1, 
1994), this subparagraph shall be applied by substituting `24-month' 
for `12-month' each place it appears.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to items and services provided on or after January 1, 1996.

SEC. 4303. EXPANSION OF CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
use a competitive process to contract with centers of excellence for 
cataract surgery, coronary artery by-pass surgery, and such other 
services as the Secretary determines to be appropriate. Payment under 
title XVIII of the Social Security Act will be made for services 
subject to such contracts on the basis of negotiated or all-inclusive 
rates as follows:
            (1) The center shall cover services provided in an urban 
        area (as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social 
        Security Act) for years beginning with fiscal year 1995.
            (2) The amount of payment made by the Secretary to the 
        center under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for 
        services covered under the contract shall be less than the 
        aggregate amount of the payments that the Secretary would have 
        made to the center for such services had the contract not been 
        in effect.
            (3) The Secretary shall make payments to the center on such 
        a basis for the following services furnished to individuals 
        entitled to benefits under such title:
                    (A) Facility, professional, and related services 
                relating to cataract surgery.
                    (B) Coronary artery bypass surgery and related 
                services.
                    (C) Such other services as the Secretary and the 
                center may agree to cover under the contract.
    (b) Rebate of Portion of Savings.--In the case of any services 
provided under a contract conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall make a payment to each individual to whom such services are 
furnished (at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may 
provide) in an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount by which--
            (1) the amount of payment that would have been made by the 
        Secretary under title XVIII of the Social Security Act to the 
        center for such services if the services had not been provided 
        under the contract, exceeds
            (2) the amount of payment made by the Secretary under such 
        title to the center for such services.

SEC. 4304. REDUCTION IN ROUTINE COST LIMITS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.

    (a) Reduction in Update To Maintain Freeze in 1996.--Section 
1861(v)(1)(L)(i) (42 U.S.C. 1395x(v)(1)(L)(i)) is amended--
            (1) in subclause (II), by striking ``or'' at the end;
            (2) in subclause (III), by striking ``112 percent,'' and 
        inserting ``and before July 1, 1996, 112 percent, or''; and
            (3) by inserting after subclause (III) the following new 
        subclause:
            ``(IV) July 1, 1996, 100 percent (adjusted by such amount 
        as the Secretary determines to be necessary to preserve the 
        savings resulting from the enactment of section 13564(a)(1) of 
        the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993),''.
    (b) Basing Limits in Subsequent Years on Median of Costs.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(i) (42 U.S.C. 
        1395x(v)(1)(L)(i)), as amended by subsection (a), is amended in 
        the matter following subclause (IV) by striking ``the mean'' 
        and inserting ``the median''.
            (2) Adjustment to limits.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(ii) (42 
        U.S.C. 1395x(v)(1)(L)(ii)) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new sentence: ``The effect of the amendments made by 
        656(b) of the Health Security Act shall not be considered by 
        the Secretary in making adjustments pursuant to this clause.''.
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1) 
        and (2) shall apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or 
        after July 1, 1997.

SEC. 4305. IMPOSITION OF 20 PERCENT COINSURANCE ON HOME HEALTH SERVICES 
              UNDER MEDICARE.

    (a) Part A.--Section 1813(a) (42 U.S.C. 1395e(a)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
    ``(5) The amount payable for a home health service furnished to an 
individual under this part shall be reduced by a copayment amount equal 
to 20 percent of the average of all the per visit costs for such 
service furnished under this title determined under section 
1861(v)(1)(L) (as determined by the Secretary on a prospective basis 
for services furnished during a calendar year).''.
    (b) Part B.--Section 1833(a)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(2)), as amended 
by section 4108(c)(2), is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``to home health 
        services,'' and by striking the comma after ``opinion)'';
            (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (3) in subparagraph (F), by striking the semicolon at the 
        end and inserting ``; and''; and
            (4) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(G) with respect to any home health service--
                            ``(i) the lesser of --
                                    ``(I) the reasonable cost of such 
                                service, as determined under section 
                                1861(v), or
                                    ``(II) the customary charges with 
                                respect to such service,
                        less the amount a provider may charge as 
                        described in clause (ii) of section 
                        1866(a)(2)(A), or
                            ``(ii) if such service is furnished by a 
                        public provider of services, or by another 
                        provider which demonstrates to the satisfaction 
                        of the Secretary that a significant portion of 
                        its patients are low-income (and requests that 
                        payment be made under this clause), free of 
                        charge or at nominal charges to the public, the 
                        amount determined in accordance with section 
                        1814(b)(2),
                less a copayment amount equal to 20 percent of the 
                average of all per visit costs for such service 
                furnished under this title determined under section 
                1861(v)(1)(L) (as determined by the Secretary on a 
                prospective basis for services furnished during a 
                calendar year);''.
    (c) Provider Charges.--Section 1866(a)(2)(A)(i) (42 U.S.C. 
1395cc(a)(2)(A)(i)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``deduction or coinsurance'' and inserting 
        ``deduction, coinsurance, or copayment''; and
            (2) by striking ``or (a)(4)'' and inserting ``(a)(4), or 
        (a)(5)''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after July 1, 1995.

SEC. 4306. TERMINATION OF GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1886(h) (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(h)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(6) Termination of payments attributable to costs of 
        training physicians.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
        this section or section 1861(v), no payment may be made under 
        this title for direct graduate medical education costs 
        attributable to an approved medical residency training program 
        for any cost reporting period (or portion thereof) beginning on 
        or after January 1, 1997.''.
    (b) Prohibition Against Recognition of Costs.--Section 1861(v)(1) 
(42 U.S.C. 1395x(v)(1)), as amended by section 4102(b), is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
    ``(U) Such regulations shall not include any provision for specific 
recognition of the costs of graduate medical education for hospitals 
for any cost reporting period (or portion thereof) beginning on or 
after January 1, 1997. Nothing in the previous sentence shall be 
construed to affect in any way payments to hospitals for the costs of 
any approved educational activities that are not described in such 
sentence.''.

SEC. 4307. MEDICARE SELECT.

    (a) Amendments to Provisions Relating to Medicare Select 
Policies.--
            (1) Permitting medicare select policies in all states.--
        Subsection (c) of section 4358 of the Omnibus Budget 
        Reconciliation Act of 1990 is hereby repealed.
            (2) Requirements of medicare select policies.--Section 
        1882(t)(1) (42 U.S.C. 1395ss(t)(1)) is amended to read as 
        follows:
    ``(1)(A) If a medicare supplemental policy meets the requirements 
of the 1991 NAIC Model Regulation or 1991 Federal Regulation and 
otherwise complies with the requirements of this section except that--
            ``(i) the benefits under such policy are restricted to 
        items and services furnished by certain entities (or reduced 
        benefits are provided when items or services are furnished by 
        other entities), and
            ``(ii) in the case of a policy described in subparagraph 
        (C)(i)--
                    ``(I) the benefits under such policy are not one of 
                the groups or packages of benefits described in 
                subsection (p)(2)(A),
                    ``(II) except for nominal copayments imposed for 
                services covered under part B of this title, such 
                benefits include at least the core group of basic 
                benefits described in subsection (p)(2)(B), and
                    ``(III) an enrollee's liability under such policy 
                for physician's services covered under part B of this 
                title is limited to the nominal copayments described in 
                subclause (II),
        the policy shall nevertheless be treated as meeting those 
        requirements if the policy meets the requirements of 
        subparagraph (B).
    ``(B) A policy meets the requirements of this subparagraph if--
            ``(i) full benefits are provided for items and services 
        furnished through a network of entities which have entered into 
        contracts or agreements with the issuer of the policy,
            ``(ii) full benefits are provided for items and services 
        furnished by other entities if the services are medically 
        necessary and immediately required because of an unforeseen 
        illness, injury, or condition and it is not reasonable given 
        the circumstances to obtain the services through the network,
            ``(iii) the network offers sufficient access,
            ``(iv) the issuer of the policy has arrangements for an 
        ongoing quality assurance program for items and services 
        furnished through the network,
            ``(v)(I) the issuer of the policy provides to each enrollee 
        at the time of enrollment an explanation of--
                    ``(aa) the restrictions on payment under the policy 
                for services furnished other than by or through the 
                network,
                    ``(bb) out of area coverage under the policy,
                    ``(cc) the policy's coverage of emergency services 
                and urgently needed care, and
                    ``(dd) the availability of a policy through the 
                entity that meets the 1991 Model NAIC Regulation or 
                1991 Federal Regulation without regard to this 
                subsection and the premium charged for such policy, and
            ``(II) each enrollee prior to enrollment acknowledges 
        receipt of the explanation provided under subclause (I), and
            ``(vi) the issuer of the policy makes available to 
        individuals, in addition to the policy described in this 
        subsection, any policy (otherwise offered by the issuer to 
        individuals in the State) that meets the 1991 Model NAIC 
        Regulation or 1991 Federal Regulation and other requirements of 
        this section without regard to this subsection.
    ``(C)(i) A policy described in this subparagraph--
            ``(I) is offered by an eligible organization (as defined in 
        section 1876(b)),
            ``(II) is not a policy or plan providing benefits pursuant 
        to a contract under section 1876 or an approved demonstration 
        project described in section 603(c) of the Social Security 
        Amendments of 1983, section 2355 of the Deficit Reduction Act 
        of 1984, or section 9412(b) of the Omnibus Budget 
        Reconciliation Act of 1986, and
            ``(III) provides benefits which, when combined with 
        benefits which are available under this title, are 
        substantially similar to benefits under policies offered to 
        individuals who are not entitled to benefits under this title.
    ``(ii) In making a determination under subclause (III) of clause 
(i) as to whether certain benefits are substantially similar, there 
shall not be taken into account, except in the case of preventive 
services, benefits provided under policies offered to individuals who 
are not entitled to benefits under this title which are in addition to 
the benefits covered by this title and which are benefits an entity 
must provide in order to meet the definition of an eligible 
organization under section 1876(b)(1).''.
    (b) Renewability of Medicare Select Policies.--Section 1882(q)(1) 
(42 U.S.C. 1395ss(q)(1)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``(1) Each'' and inserting ``(1)(A) Except 
        as provided in subparagraph (B), each'';
            (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses 
        (i) and (ii), respectively; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
            ``(B)(i) In the case of a policy that meets the 
        requirements of subsection (t), an issuer may cancel or 
        nonrenew such policy with respect to an individual who leaves 
        the service area of such policy; except that, if such 
        individual moves to a geographic area where such issuer, or 
        where an affiliate of such issuer, is issuing medicare 
        supplemental policies, such individual must be permitted to 
        enroll in any medicare supplemental policy offered by such 
        issuer or affiliate that provides benefits comparable to or 
        less than the benefits provided in the policy being canceled or 
        nonrenewed. An individual whose coverage is canceled or 
        nonrenewed under this subparagraph shall, as part of the notice 
        of termination or nonrenewal, be notified of the right to 
        enroll in other medicare supplemental policies offered by the 
        issuer or its affiliates.
            ``(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
        `affiliate' shall have the meaning given such term by the 1991 
        NAIC Model Regulation.''.
    (c) Civil Penalty.--Section 1882(t)(2) (42 U.S.C. 1395ss(t)(2)) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking ``(2)'' and inserting ``(2)(A)'';
            (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D) 
        as clauses (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv), respectively;
            (3) in clause (iv), as redesignated--
                    (A) by striking ``paragraph (1)(E)(i)'' and 
                inserting ``paragraph (1)(B)(v)(I); and
                    (B) by striking ``paragraph (1)(E)(ii)'' and 
                inserting ``paragraph (1)(B)(v)(II)'';
            (4) by striking ``the previous sentence'' and inserting 
        ``this subparagraph''; and
            (5) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
    ``(B) If the Secretary determines that an issuer of a policy 
approved under paragraph (1) has made a misrepresentation to the 
Secretary or has provided the Secretary with false information 
regarding such policy, the issuer is subject to a civil money penalty 
in an amount not to exceed $100,000 for each such determination. The 
provisions of section 1128A (other than the first sentence of 
subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil 
money penalty under this subparagraph in the same manner as such 
provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).''.
    (d) Effective Dates.--
            (1) NAIC standards.--If, within 9 months after the date of 
        the enactment of this Act, the National Association of 
        Insurance Commissioners (hereafter in this subsection referred 
        to as the ``NAIC'') makes changes in the 1991 NAIC Model 
        Regulation (as defined in section 1882(p)(1)(A) of the Social 
        Security Act) to incorporate the additional requirements 
        imposed by the amendments made by this section, section 
        1882(g)(2)(A) of such Act shall be applied in each State, 
        effective for policies issued to policyholders on and after the 
        date specified in paragraph (3), as if the reference to the 
        Model Regulation adopted on June 6, 1979, were a reference to 
        the 1991 NAIC Model Regulation (as so defined) as changed under 
        this paragraph (such changed Regulation referred to in this 
        subsection as the ``1995 NAIC Model Regulation'').
            (2) Secretary standards.--If the NAIC does not make changes 
        in the 1991 NAIC Model Regulation (as so defined) within the 9-
        month period specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary of 
        Health and Human Services (hereafter in this subsection 
        referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall promulgate a regulation 
        and section 1882(g)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act shall be 
        applied in each State, effective for policies issued to 
        policyholders on and after the date specified in paragraph (3), 
        as if the reference to the Model Regulation adopted on June 6, 
        1979, were a reference to the 1991 NAIC Model Regulation (as so 
        defined) as changed by the Secretary under this paragraph (such 
        changed Regulation referred to in this subsection as the ``1995 
        Federal Regulation'').
            (3) Date specified.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
                date specified in this paragraph for a State is the 
                earlier of--
                            (i) the date the State adopts the 1995 NAIC 
                        Model Regulation or the 1995 Federal 
                        Regulation, or
                            (ii) 1 year after the date the NAIC or the 
                        Secretary first adopts such regulations.
                    (B) Additional legislative action required.--In the 
                case of a State which the Secretary identifies, in 
                consultation with the NAIC, as--
                            (i) requiring State legislation (other than 
                        legislation appropriating funds) in order for 
                        medicare supplemental policies to meet the 1995 
                        NAIC Model Regulation or the 1995 Federal 
                        Regulation, but
                            (ii) having a legislature which is not 
                        scheduled to meet in 1995 in a legislative 
                        session in which such legislation may be 
                        considered,
                the date specified in this paragraph is the first day 
                of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close 
                of the first legislative session of the State 
                legislature that begins on or after January 1, 1996. 
                For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a 
                State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year 
                of such session shall be deemed to be a separate 
                regular session of the State legislature.

                      Subtitle B--Medicaid Program

PART 1--INTEGRATION OF CERTAIN MEDICAID ELIGIBLES INTO REFORMED HEALTH 
                              CARE SYSTEM

SEC. 4601. LIMITING COVERAGE UNDER MEDICAID OF ITEMS AND SERVICES 
              COVERED UNDER STANDARD BENEFIT PACKAGE.

    (a) In General.--Title XIX (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by 
redesignating section 1931 as section 1932 and by inserting after 
section 1930 the following new section:

   ``treatment of items and services in the standard benefit package

    ``Sec. 1931. (a) Items and Services Covered Under Standard Benefit 
Package.--Except as provided in subsection (c), a State plan under this 
part shall not provide medical assistance consisting of payment for 
items and services in the standard benefit package described in section 
1201(a) of the Health Security Act.
    ``(b) Medical Assistance Not Affected.--Subsection (a) shall not be 
construed as--
            ``(1) affecting the eligibility of any individual for 
        medical assistance consisting of payment for items and services 
        not covered under the standard benefits package;
            ``(2) affecting the amount, duration, and scope of any 
        medical assistance consisting of payment for the items and 
        services described in paragraph (1); or
            ``(3) prohibiting payment of medical assistance for items 
        and services covered under the standard benefits package to the 
        extent that the items and services under this part exceed the 
        items and services covered under such package with respect to 
        amount, duration, and scope.
    ``(c) Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not affect the provision of 
medical assistance consisting of payment for items and services in the 
standard benefits package--
            ``(1) which are provided to--
                    ``(A) an individual eligible for medical assistance 
                under the State plan who is not a premium subsidy 
                eligible individual (as defined in 6002(a)(2) of the 
                Health Security Act);
                    ``(B) an individual with respect to whom 
                supplemental security income benefits are being paid 
                under title XVI; and
                    ``(C) an individual who is eligible for benefits 
                under part A of title XVIII; or
            ``(2) which consist of emergency services to certain aliens 
        under section 1903(v)(2).
    ``(d) State Maintenance of Effort.--
            ``(1) In general.--
                    ``(A) Reduction in quarterly payments.--For any 
                calendar quarter in an applicable year (as defined in 
                subparagraph (B)), the amount otherwise payable to a 
                State under section 1903 for the quarter shall be 
                reduced by the State maintenance of effort amount for 
                the quarter determined under paragraph (2).
                    ``(B) Applicable year.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, the term `applicable year' means 1997 and 
                any succeeding year.
            ``(2) Maintenance of effort amount.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The maintenance of effort amount 
                for a State for a calendar quarter in an applicable 
                year shall be equal to 25 percent of the sum of--
                            ``(i) the State's AFDC eligibles payment 
                        amount for the year determined under paragraph 
                        (3); and
                            ``(ii) the State's non-cash eligibles 
                        payment amount for the year determined under 
                        paragraph (4).
            ``(3) State afdc eligibles payment amount.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The AFDC eligibles payment 
                amount for a State for a year is an amount equal to the 
                product of--
                            ``(i) the adjusted State per capita amount 
                        for the year determined under subparagraph (B); 
                        multiplied by
                            ``(ii) the number of AFDC eligible 
                        individuals receiving premium assistance under 
                        section 6002 of the Health Security Act during 
                        the year (as estimated by the Secretary).
                    ``(B) Adjusted state per capita amount.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The adjusted State per 
                        capita amount for a year is the base State per 
                        capita amount determined under clause (ii) 
                        updated by the percentage change in per capita 
                        health expenditures index (as described in 
                        paragraph (5)(B)) during the period beginning 
                        on October 1, 1994, and ending on December 31 
                        of the year preceding the applicable year (as 
                        determined by the Secretary).
                            ``(ii) Base state per capita amount.--The 
                        base per capita amount for a State shall be an 
                        amount, as determined by the Secretary, equal 
                        to the quotient of--
                                    ``(I) the total expenditures from 
                                State funds made under the State plan 
                                during fiscal year 1994 with respect to 
                                medical assistance consisting of items 
                                and services of the type included in 
                                the standard benefit package for AFDC 
                                eligible individuals; divided by
                                    ``(II) the average total number of 
                                AFDC eligible individuals who received 
                                such medical assistance under the State 
                                plan in any month during fiscal year 
                                1994.
                            ``(iii) Disproportionate share payments not 
                        included.--In applying clause (ii), payments 
                        made under section 1923 shall not be counted in 
                        the gross amount of payments.
                    ``(C) AFDC eligible defined.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, the term `AFDC eligible' means an individual 
                who receives aid or assistance under any plan of the 
                State approved under part A or part E of title IV.
            ``(4) Non-cash eligibles payment amount.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The non-cash eligibles payment 
                amount for a State for a year is an amount equal to the 
                State's base payment amount (determined under 
                subparagraph (B)) for the applicable year updated by 
                the percentage change in the health expenditures index 
                (as described in paragraph (5)(A)) and the State 
                population index (as described in paragraph (5)(C)) 
                during the period beginning on October 1, 1994, and 
                ending on December 31 of the year preceding the 
                applicable year (as determined by the Secretary).
                    ``(B) State base payment amount.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The base payment amount 
                        for a State for an applicable year shall be an 
                        amount, as determined by the Secretary, equal 
                        to the total expenditures from State funds made 
                        under the State plan during fiscal year 1994 
                        with respect to medical assistance consisting 
                        of items and services of the type included in 
                        the standard benefit package for non-cash 
                        eligible individuals who would not have 
                        received such medical assistance if the 
                        provisions of this section and subtitle A of 
                        title VI of the Health Security Act had been in 
                        effect in fiscal year 1994.
                            ``(ii) Disproportionate share payments 
                        included.--In applying clause (i), payments 
                        made under section 1923 shall be counted in the 
                        gross amount of payments.
                    ``(C) Non-cash eligible defined.--For purposes of 
                this paragraph, the term `non-cash eligible' means any 
                individual who received medical assistance under the 
                State plan during fiscal year 1994 other than an AFDC 
                eligible individual or an individual described in 
                subsection (b).
            ``(5) Indexes.--
                    ``(A) Health expenditures index.--The Secretary 
                shall establish a health expenditures index which 
                measures the change in national health expenditures 
                from year to year.
                    ``(B) Per capita health expenditures index.--The 
                Secretary shall establish a per capita health 
                expenditures index which measures the change in 
                national per capita health expenditures from year to 
                year.
                    ``(C) State population index.--The Secretary shall 
                establish a State population index which measures the 
                change in the number of individuals residing in a State 
                from year to year.''.
    (b) No Federal Financial Participation.--Section 1903(i) (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(i)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (14),
            (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and 
        inserting ``; or'', and
            (3) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(16) with respect to items and services covered under the 
        standard benefit package described in section 1201(a) of the 
        Health Security Act for individuals to whom section 1931(a) 
        applies.''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to items or services furnished in a State on or 
after January 1, 1997.

   PART 2--COORDINATED CARE SERVICES FOR DISABLED MEDICAID ELIGIBLES

SEC. 4605. COORDINATED CARE SERVICES FOR DISABLED MEDICAID ELIGIBLES.

    (a) State Expenditures Limited to Certified Health Plans.--Section 
1903(m) (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
            ``(7) No payment shall be made under this part to a State 
        with respect to expenditures incurred by the State for payment 
        for services provided by an entity with a contract under this 
        subsection unless such entity is a standard health plan (as 
        defined in section 1011(2)(B) of the Health Security Act).''.
    (b) Modification to 75/25 Rule.--Section 1903(m)(2)(A)(ii) (42 
U.S.C. 1396b(m)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking ``75 percent'' and 
inserting ``50 percent''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
become effective with respect to payments for calendar quarters 
beginning on or after January 1, 1997.

      PART 3--PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS SERVING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS

SEC. 4611. REPLACEMENT OF DSH PAYMENT PROVISIONS WITH PROVISIONS 
              RELATING TO PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS SERVING VULNERABLE 
              POPULATIONS.

    (a) Amendments to Provisions Requiring States to Make DSH Payment 
Adjustments.--
            (1) Adjustments to national dsh payment limit.--Section 
        1923(f)(1)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(1)(B)) is amended to read 
        as follows:
                    ``(B) National dsh payment limit.--
                            ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clause (ii), the national DSH payment limit for 
                        a fiscal year is equal to 12 percent of the 
                        total amount of expenditures under the State 
                        plans under this part for medical assistance 
                        during the fiscal year.
                            ``(ii) Reduction in limit.--For fiscal 
                        years ending in a calendar year during which 
                        the percentage of individuals covered by 
                        insurance, as determined by the National Health 
                        Care Cost and Coverage Commission established 
                        under section 10001 of the Health Security 
                        Act--
                                    ``(I) equals or exceeds 85 percent 
                                but is less than 88 percent, `10 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i);
                                    ``(II) equals or exceeds 88 percent 
                                but is less than 90 percent, `8 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i);
                                    ``(III) equals or exceeds 90 
                                percent but is less than 92 percent, `6 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i); and
                                    ``(IV) equals or exceeds 92 
                                percent, `4 percent' shall be 
                                substituted for `12 percent' in clause 
                                (i).
            (2) Adjustments to state allotment limits.--Section 
        1923(f)(2)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(2)(B)) is amended to read 
        as follows:
                    ``(B) Exceptions.--
                            ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clause (ii), a State DSH allotment under 
                        subparagraph (A) for a fiscal year shall not 
                        exceed 12 percent of the total amount of 
                        expenditures under the State plan for medical 
                        assistance during the fiscal year.
                            ``(ii) Reduction in limit.--For fiscal 
                        years ending in a calendar year during which 
                        the percentage of individuals covered by 
                        insurance, as determined by the National Health 
                        Care Cost and Coverage Commission established 
                        under section 10001 of the Health Security 
                        Act--
                                    ``(I) equals or exceeds 85 percent 
                                but is less than 88 percent, `10 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i);
                                    ``(II) equals or exceeds 88 percent 
                                but is less than 90 percent, `8 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i);
                                    ``(III) equals or exceeds 90 
                                percent but is less than 92 percent, `6 
                                percent' shall be substituted for `12 
                                percent' in clause (i); and
                                    ``(IV) equals or exceeds 92 
                                percent, `4 percent' shall be 
                                substituted for `12 percent' in clause 
                                (i).
            (3) Elimination of high dsh states and state supplemental 
        amounts.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 1923(f)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 
                1396r-4(f)(2)(A)) is amended to read as follows:
                    ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
                State DSH allotment for a fiscal year is equal to the 
                State DSH allotment for the previous fiscal year 
                increased by the State growth factor (as defined in 
                paragraph (3)(B)) for the fiscal year.''.
                    (B) Conforming amendments.--(i) Section 1923(f) (42 
                U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)) is amended by striking paragraph (3) 
                and redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
                    (ii) Section 1923(f)(3) (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)(3)), 
                as redesignated by clause (i), is amended by striking 
                subparagraphs (A) and (C) and redesignating 
                subparagraphs (B), (D), and (E) as subparagraphs (A), 
                (B), and (C).
                    (iii) Section 1923(f)(3)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
                4(f)(3)(B)), as redesignated by clauses (i) and (ii), 
                is amended to read as follows:
                    ``(B) State growth amount.--The term `State growth 
                amount' means, with respect to a State for a fiscal 
                year, the product of the State growth factor and the 
                State DSH payment limit for the previous fiscal 
                year.''.
                    (iv) Section 1923(f)(1)(A) (42 U.S.C. 1396r-
                4(f)(1)(A) is amended by striking ``(as defined in 
                paragraph (4)(B))'' and inserting ``(as defined in 
                paragraph (3)(A))''.
            (3) Termination of requirement on states to make dsh 
        payment adjustments.--Section 1923 (42 U.S.C. 1396r-4) is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(h) Termination of Requirement to Make Payment Adjustments.--
            ``(1) In general.--Any requirement imposed by this section 
        on a State to increase the rate or amount of payment for 
        inpatient hospital services provided by a hospital which serves 
        a disproportionate number of low income patients with special 
        needs shall terminate in the year described in paragraph (2).
            ``(2) Year described.--The year described in this paragraph 
        is the first year beginning after the year during which the 
        percentage of individuals covered by insurance, as determined 
        by the National Health Care Cost and Coverage Commission 
        established under section 100001 of the Health Security Act, 
        equals or exceeds 92 percent.''.
            (4) No federal financial participation.--Section 1903(i) 
        (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)), as amended by section 4601(b), is 
        amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph 
                (15),
                    (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
                (16) and inserting ``; or'', and
                    (C) by inserting after paragraph (16) the following 
                new paragraph:
            ``(17) during or after the year described in section 
        1923(h)(2) with respect to any payment made by a State to a 
        hospital which serves a disproportionate number of low income 
        patients with special needs that is in excess of the payment 
        otherwise required under this part.''.
            (5) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section 
        shall be effective for calendar quarters beginning on or after 
        January 1, 1997.
    (b) Payments to Hospitals Serving Vulnerable Populations.--Title 
XIX (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new part:

     ``PART B--PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS SERVING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS

``SEC. 1951. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS.

    ``(a) Entitlement Status.--The Secretary shall make payments in 
accordance with this part to eligible hospitals described in section 
1952. The preceding sentence constitutes budget authority in advance of 
appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the Federal 
Government to provide funding for such payments in the amounts, and for 
the fiscal years, specified in subsection (b).
    ``(b) Amount of Entitlement.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
amounts and fiscal years specified in this subsection are (in the 
aggregate for all eligible hospitals) $2,500,000,000 for the first 
applicable fiscal year (as defined in section 1954) and for each 
subsequent fiscal year.
    ``(c) Payments Made on Quarterly Basis.--Payments to an eligible 
hospital under this section for a year shall be made on a quarterly 
basis during the year.

``SEC. 1952. IDENTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOSPITALS.

    ``(a) Hospitals in Participating States.--In order to be an 
eligible hospital under this part, a hospital must be located in a 
State that is a participating State under title I of the Health 
Security Act.
    ``(b) State Identification.--In accordance with the criteria 
described in subsection (c) and such procedures as the Secretary may 
require, each State shall identify the hospitals in the State that meet 
such criteria and provide the Secretary with a list of such hospitals.
    ``(c) Criteria for Eligibility.--A hospital meets the criteria 
described in this subsection if the hospital's low-income utilization 
rate for the base year under section 1923(b)(3) (as such section is in 
effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this part) is not 
less than 25 percent.

``SEC. 1953. AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS.

    ``(a) In General.--The total amount available for payments under 
this part in a year shall be allocated to hospitals for low-income 
assistance in accordance with this subsection.
    ``(b) Determination of Hospital Payment Amount.--The amount of 
payment to an eligible hospital during a year shall be the equal to the 
hospital's low-income percentage (as defined in subsection (c)) of the 
total amount available for payments under this part for the year.
    ``(c) Low-Income Percentage Defined.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, an 
        eligible hospital's `low-income percentage' for a year is equal 
        to the amount (expressed as a percentage) of the total low-
        income days for all eligible hospitals for the year that are 
        attributable to the hospital.
            ``(2) Low-income days described.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), an eligible hospital's low-income days for a year shall be 
        equal to the product of--
                    ``(A) the total number of inpatient days for the 
                hospital for the year (as reported to the Secretary by 
                the State in which the hospital is located, in 
                accordance with a reporting schedule and procedures 
                established by the Secretary); and
                    ``(B) the hospital's low-income utilization rate 
                for the base year under section 1923(b)(3) (as such 
                section is in effect on the day before the date of the 
                enactment of this part).

``SEC. 1954. DEFINITIONS.

    ``For purposes of this part:
            ``(1) Base year.--The term `base year' means 1996.
            ``(2) First applicable fiscal year--The term `first 
        applicable fiscal year' means first fiscal year that begins 
        after the fiscal year ending in the calendar year during which 
        the percentage of individuals covered by insurance, as 
        determined by the National Health Care Cost and Coverage 
        Commission established under section 10001 of the Health 
        Security Act, equals or exceeds 92 percent.''.
    (c) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Title XIX (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) 
is amended by striking the title and inserting the following:

  ``TITLE XIX--MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS AND PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS 
                    SERVING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS''

     ``PART A--GRANTS TO STATES FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS''.

    (2) Title XIX (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by striking each 
reference to ``this title'' and inserting ``this part''.

               PART 4--MEDICAID LONG-TERM CARE PROVISIONS

SEC. 4615. INCREASED RESOURCE DISREGARD FOR INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING 
              CERTAIN SERVICES.

    (a) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E);
            (2) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (F); and
            (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(G) provide that, in determining the eligibility 
                of any unmarried individual who has applied for or is 
                receiving medical assistance consisting of community-
                based services furnished under a waiver under 
                subsection (c) or (d) of section 1915, personal care 
                services described in section 1905(a)(24), or home and 
                community care for functionally disabled elderly 
                individuals under section 1929, the first $4,000 of 
                resources may, at the option of the State, be 
                disregarded.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to payments for medical assistance for calendar quarters 
beginning on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4616. FRAIL ELDERLY DEMONSTRATION PROJECT WAIVERS.

    (a) Expansion of Number of Waivers.--Section 9412(b)(1) of the 
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 is amended by striking ``15'' 
and inserting ``40''.
    (b) Development of Protocols and Model Certification Guidelines.--
Section 9412(b) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
            ``(5) The Secretary, in consultation with the States and 
        organizations operating projects in accordance with waivers 
        under this subsection shall develop and publish a waiver 
        protocol that will establish minimum standard requirements that 
        an organization must meet to be eligible for a waiver under 
        this subsection. In developing the protocol under the preceding 
        sentence, the Secretary shall incorporate standards for 
        organizations to deliver integrated acute and long-term care 
        services for the elderly, children, and young adults.
            ``(6) The Secretary shall develop model guidelines that 
        shall be available to States that choose to establish a 
        comprehensive procedure for the licensure and certification of 
        an organization operating a demonstration project under a 
        waiver granted pursuant to this subsection. Such guidelines 
        shall encompass the range of services provided by such an 
        organization.''.
    (c) Evaluations and Reports.--Section 9412(b) of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1986, as amended by subsection (b), is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(7)(A) The Secretary shall develop standard evaluation 
        protocols to assess the cost-effectiveness and quality of 
        service provided under--
                    ``(i) demonstration projects operating on the date 
                of the enactment of this paragraph under waivers 
                granted pursuant to this subsection; and
                    ``(ii) demonstration projects granted waivers after 
                the date of the enactment of this paragraph.
            ``(B) The Secretary shall conduct evaluations of the 
        demonstration projects in accordance with the protocols 
        developed under subparagraph (A) and based on the results of 
        such evaluations, report to the Committee on Finance of the 
        Senate, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of 
        Representatives, and the Subcommittee on Health and the 
        Environment of the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
        House of Representatives by--
                    ``(i) not later than January 1, 1998, with respect 
                to demonstration projects described in subparagraph 
                (A)(i); and
                    ``(ii) not later than January 1, 2003, with respect 
                to demonstration projects described in subparagraph 
                (A)(ii);
        on the desirability of granting permanent status under titles 
        XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to such demonstration 
        projects that the Secretary has determined to be successful.''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 4617. ELIMINATION OF REQUIREMENT OF PRIOR INSTITUTIONALIZATION 
              WITH RESPECT TO HABILITATION SERVICES FURNISHED UNDER A 
              WAIVER FOR HOME OR COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1915(c)(5) (42 U.S.C. 1396n(c)(5)) is 
amended in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by striking ``, with 
respect to individuals who receive such services after discharge from a 
nursing facility or intermediate care facility for the mentally 
retarded''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4618. ELIMINATION OF RULE REGARDING AVAILABILITY OF BEDS IN 
              CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS.

    (a) In General.--The first sentence of section 1915(c)(1) (42 
U.S.C. 1396n(c)(1)) is amended by inserting the following before the 
end period: ``(at the option of the State, such determination may be 
made without regard to the availability of beds in such a hospital, 
nursing facility, or intermediate care facility for the mentally 
retarded located in the State)''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall be 
effective with respect to waivers granted or renewed on or after 
January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4619. PREADMISSION SCREENING FOR MENTALLY RETARDED INDIVIDUALS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1919(b)(3)(F)(ii) (42 U.S.C. 
1396r(b)(3)(F)(ii)) is amended by striking ``that, because'' and all 
that follows through the period at the end and inserting ``that the 
individual's primary need is for medical services that are at the level 
provided by the nursing facility and that the nursing facility has the 
capability to provide any specialized services necessary for 
habilitation of the individual.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to admissions on or after July 1, 1995.

                         PART 5--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 4621. MEDICAID COVERAGE OF ALL CERTIFIED NURSE PRACTITIONER AND 
              CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Paragraph (21) of section 1905(a) (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(a)) is amended to read as follows:
            ``(21) services furnished by all certified nurse 
        practitioners (as defined by the Secretary) or clinical nurse 
        specialists (as defined in subsection (t)) which the certified 
        nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist is legally 
        authorized to perform under State law (or the State regulatory 
        mechanism provided by State law), whether or not the certified 
        nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist is under the 
        supervision of, or associated with, a physician or other health 
        care provider;''.
    (b) Clinical Nurse Specialist Defined.--Section 1905 (42 U.S.C. 
1396) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(t) The term `clinical nurse specialist' means an individual 
who--
            ``(1) is a registered nurse and is licensed to practice 
        nursing in the State in which the clinical nurse specialist 
        services are performed; and
            ``(2) holds a master's degree in a defined clinical area of 
        nursing from an accredited educational institution.''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
become effective with respect to payments for calendar quarters 
beginning on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 4622. RELIEF FROM THIRD PARTY LIABILITY REQUIREMENTS WHEN COST-
              EFFECTIVE.

    (a) In General.--Section 1902(a)(25)(B) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(25)(B)) 
is amended to read as follows--
            ``(B) that in any case where such a legal liability is 
        found to exist after medical assistance has been made 
        available, the State or local agency will seek reimbursement 
        for such assistance to the extent of such legal liability, 
        unless--
                    ``(i) the amount of reimbursement the State can 
                reasonably expect to recover for medical assistance 
                furnished to an individual does not exceed the costs of 
                such recovery, or
                    ``(ii) with respect to case management services (as 
                defined in section 1915(g)(2)), the State demonstrates 
                to the satisfaction of the Secretary (using the methods 
                specified by the Secretary under subsection (aa)) that 
                it is not cost-effective in the aggregate to seek such 
                recovery with respect to such services furnished to 
                individuals covered under the State plan;''.
    (b) Methods for Demonstration.--Section 1902(a) (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(aa) The Secretary shall specify in regulations the methods by 
which a State may demonstrate that it is not cost-effective in the 
aggregate to seek reimbursement for medical assistance paid for case 
management services under subsection (a)(25)(B)(ii). The methods 
specified by the Secretary under the preceding sentence shall include 
allowing a State to demonstrate that case management services are not 
generally covered by health insurers in the State.''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to payments for medical assistance for calendar quarters 
beginning on or after January 1, 1995.

                TITLE V--QUALITY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

             Subtitle A--Quality Management and Improvement

SEC. 5001. NATIONAL QUALITY COUNCIL.

    (a) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
establish a council to be known as the National Quality Council to 
oversee a program of quality management and improvement designed to 
enhance the quality, appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care 
services and access to such services.
    (b) Appointment.--The National Quality Council shall consist of 15 
members appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, who are broadly representative of the population of the United 
States and shall include the following:
            (1) Individuals and health care providers distinguished in 
        the fields of medicine, public health, health care quality, and 
        related fields of health services research. Such members shall 
        constitute at least one-third of the Council's membership.
            (2) Individuals representing consumers of health care 
        services. Such members shall constitute at least one-third of 
        the Council's membership.
            (3) Other individuals representing purchasers of health 
        care, health plans, States, and nationally recognized health 
        care accreditation organizations.
    (c) Duties.--The National Quality Council shall--
            (1) develop national goals and performance measures of 
        quality;
            (2) develop uniform quality goals and performance measures 
        for plans;
            (3) oversee the design and implementation of a program of 
        national surveys of plans and consumers;
            (4) oversee the design and production of Consumer Report 
        Cards;
            (5) oversee Quality Improvement Foundations;
            (6) oversee National and State-based Consumer Information 
        and Advocacy Centers; and
            (7) oversee the evaluation of the impact of the 
        implementation of this Act on the quality of health care 
        services in the United States and the access of consumers to 
        such services.
    (d) Consultation.--In carrying out these duties, the National 
Quality Council shall establish a process of consultation with 
appropriate interested parties.
    (e) Terms.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
        members of the Council shall serve for a term of 4 years.
            (2) Staggered rotation.--Of the members first appointed to 
        the Council under subsection (b), the President shall appoint 
        members to serve for a term of between 1 and 4 years so that no 
        more than one third of the Council seats are vacated each year.
            (3) Service beyond term.--A member of the Council may 
        continue to serve after the expiration of the term of the 
        member until a successor is appointed.
    (f) Vacancies.--If a member of the Council does not serve the full 
term applicable under subsection (e), the individual appointed to fill 
the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term 
of the predecessor of the individual.
    (g) Chair.--The President shall designate an individual to serve as 
the chair of the Council.
    (h) Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less than once during 
each 4-month period and shall otherwise meet at the call of the 
President or the chair.
    (i) Compensation and Reimbursement of Expenses.--Members of the 
Council shall receive compensation for each day (including travel time) 
engaged in carrying out the duties of the Council. Such compensation 
may not be in an amount in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay 
payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of 
title 5, United States Code.
    (j) Conflicts of Interest.--Members of the Council shall disclose 
upon appointment to the Council or at any subsequent time that it may 
occur, conflicts of interest.
    (k) Executive Director; Staff.--
            (1) Executive director.--
                    (A) In general.--The Council shall, without regard 
                to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, 
                appoint an Executive Director.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director shall be paid at a 
                rate equivalent to a rate for the Senior Executive 
                Service.
            (2) Staff.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
                (C), the Executive Director, with the approval of the 
                Council, may appoint and fix the pay of additional 
                personnel.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director may make such 
                appointments without regard to the provisions of title 
                5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
                competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may 
                be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 
                and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, 
                relating to classification and General Schedule pay 
                rates, except that an individual so appointed may not 
                receive pay in excess of 120 percent of the annual rate 
                of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
                    (C) Detailed personnel.--Upon request of the 
                Executive Director, the head of any Federal department 
                or agency may detail any of the personnel of that 
                department or agency to the Council to assist the 
                Council in carrying out its duties under this Act.
    (l) Contract Authority.--To the extent provided in advance in 
appropriations Acts, the Council may contract with any person 
(including an agency of the Federal Government) for studies and 
analysis as required to execute its functions. Any employee of the 
Executive Branch may be detailed to the Council to assist the Council 
in carrying out its duties.
    (m) Consultations with Experts.--The Council may consult with any 
outside expert individuals or groups that the Council determines 
appropriate in performing its duties under this section. The Council 
may establish advisory committees.
    (n) Access to Information.--The Council may secure directly from 
any department or agency of the United States information necessary to 
enable it to carry out its functions, to the extent such information is 
otherwise available to a department or agency of the United States. 
Upon request of the chair, the head of that department or agency shall 
furnish that information to the Council.
    (o) Delegation of Authority.--Except as otherwise provided, the 
Council may delegate any function to such officers and employees as the 
Council may designate and may authorize such successive redelegations 
of such functions with the Council as the Council deems to be necessary 
or appropriate. No delegation of functions by the Council shall relieve 
the Council of responsibility for the administration of such functions.
    (p) Rulemaking.--The Council is authorized to establish such rules 
as may be necessary to carry out this section.
    (q) Health Care Provider.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
``health care provider'' means an individual who, or entity that, 
provides an item or service to an individual that is covered under the 
health plan (as defined in section 1111) in which the individual is 
enrolled.

SEC. 5002. NATIONAL GOALS AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF QUALITY.

    (a) In General.--The National Quality Council shall develop a set 
of national quality goals and performance measures of quality for both 
the general population and for population subgroups defined by 
demographic characteristics and health status. The goals and measures 
shall incorporate goals identified by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services for meeting public health objectives utilizing, but not 
limited to, goals delineated in Healthy People 2000.
    (b) Subject of Measures.--National measures of quality performance 
shall be developed under subsection (a) in a manner that provides 
statistical and other information on at least the following subjects:
            (1) Outcomes of health care services and procedures.
            (2) Population health status.
            (3) Health promotion.
            (4) Prevention of diseases, disorders, disabilities, 
        injuries, and other health conditions.
            (5) Access to care and appropriateness of care.
            (6) Consumer satisfaction.

SEC. 5003. STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) Development.--
            (1) In general.--The National Quality Council shall 
        establish national standards and performance measures for 
        health plans, which may be used to assess the provision of 
        health care services and access to such services, both for the 
        general population and population subgroups defined by 
        demographic characteristics and health status. In subject 
        matter areas with which the National Quality Council determines 
        that sufficient information and consensus exist, the Council 
        shall establish goals for performance by health plans 
        consistent with the national goals and performance measures 
        established under section 5002.
            (2) Measures and standards.--
                    (A) Measures.--Quality measures under this section 
                shall relate, at a minimum, to:
                            (i) Access by consumers to health care 
                        services and providers.
                            (ii) Appropriateness of health care 
                        services.
                            (iii) Consumer satisfaction.
                            (iv) Outcomes of care.
                            (v) Disease prevention and health 
                        promotion.
                    (B) Standards.--Quality standards under this 
                section at a minimum shall relate to:
                            (i) Health plan compliance with members' 
                        rights under this Act.
                            (ii) Quality improvement and 
                        accountability.
                            (iii) Documentation and review of provider 
                        credentialing and competency.
                            (iv) Management of clinical, and 
                        administrative and financial information.
    (b) Certification of Plans.--The National Quality Council shall 
provide information and technical assistance to the Secretary and the 
States concerning the use of national standards and performance 
measures developed under this section for State certification of health 
plans.

SEC. 5004. PLAN DATA ANALYSIS AND CONSUMER SURVEYS.

    (a) In General.--The National Quality Council shall oversee the 
design and conduct of periodic surveys of health care consumers and 
plans to gather information concerning the quality measures established 
under sections 5002 and 5003. The surveys shall monitor consumer 
reaction to the implementation of this Act and, in coordination with 
relevant data from health plans and other sources, be designed to 
assess the impact of this Act both for the general population of the 
United States and for populations vulnerable to discrimination or to 
receiving inadequate care due to health status, demographic 
characteristics, or geographic location.
    (b) Survey Administration and Data Analysis.--The National Quality 
Council shall approve a standard design for the consumer surveys and 
sampling of relevant plan data described in subsection (a) which shall 
be administered by the Administrator of the Agency for Health Care 
Policy and Research or such other appropriate entity as the Council 
shall designate on a plan-by-plan and State-by-State basis. Sufficient 
consumer survey and plan data shall be collected and verified to 
provide for reliable and valid analysis. A State may add survey 
questions on quality measures of local interest to surveys conducted in 
the State. The plan-level survey shall include a subset of consumer 
survey questions related to consumer satisfaction, perceived health 
status, access, and such other survey items designated by the Council.
    (c) Sampling Strategies.--The National Quality Council shall 
approve sampling strategies under subsection (a) that ensure that 
appropriate survey samples adequately measure populations that are 
considered to be at risk of receiving inadequate health care or may be 
difficult to reach through consumer-sampling methods, including 
individuals who--
            (1) fail to enroll in a health plan;
            (2) resign from a plan; or
            (3) are vulnerable to discrimination or to receiving 
        inadequate care due to health status, demographic 
        characteristics, or geographic location.
    (d) Survey Integration.--To the extent feasible, the consumer and 
plan surveys developed under this section shall be integrated with 
existing Federal surveys.

SEC. 5005. EVALUATION AND REPORTING OF QUALITY PERFORMANCE.

    (a) Health Plan Reports.--Each State annually shall publish and 
make available to the public and Consumer Information and Advocacy 
Centers a performance report, in a standard format designated by the 
National Quality Council, outlining the performance of each health plan 
offered in the State with respect to the set of national measures of 
quality performance developed under sections 5002 and 5003. The report 
shall include--
            (1) the results of a smaller number of such measures for 
        health care providers if the available information is 
        statistically meaningful; and
            (2) the results of consumer surveys and an analysis of the 
        plan data collected in section 5004.
    (b) Consumer Report Cards.--The health plan reports under 
subsection (a) shall be summarized in a consumer report card as 
specified by the National Quality Council and made available by the 
State through the Consumer Information and Advocacy Centers to all 
individuals in the State.
    (c) Quality Reports.--The National Quality Council annually shall 
provide recommendations to the Congress, the National Health Benefits 
Board, and the Secretary in the form of a summary report that--
            (1) outlines in a standard format the performance of each 
        State;
            (2) discusses State-level and national trends relating to 
        health care quality; and
            (3) presents data for each State from health plan reports 
        and consumer surveys that were conducted during the year.

SEC. 5006. DEVELOPMENT AND DISSEMINATION OF PRACTICE GUIDELINES.

    The National Quality Council may advise the Secretary and the 
Administrator of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research 
concerning priorities for the development and periodic review and 
updating of clinically relevant guidelines established under section 
912 of the Public Health Service Act.

SEC. 5007. RESEARCH ON HEALTH CARE QUALITY.

    The National Quality Council may make recommendations to the 
Secretary and the Administrator of the Agency for Health Care Policy 
and Research concerning priorities for research with respect to the 
quality, appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care.

SEC. 5008. QUALITY IMPROVEMENT FOUNDATIONS.

    (a) Establishment.--The National Quality Council shall oversee the 
operation of quality improvement foundations in performing the duties 
specified in subsection (c).
    (b) Structure and Membership.--
            (1) Grant process.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
        Council, shall, through a competitive grantmaking process, 
        award grants for the establishment and operation of a quality 
        improvement foundation in each State or region (as defined in 
        paragraph (2)(B)).
            (2) Establishment of geographic areas.--The Secretary shall 
        establish throughout the United States geographic areas with 
        respect to which grants under this section will be made. In 
        establishing such areas, the Secretary shall take into account 
        the following criteria:
                    (A) State areas.--Each State shall generally be 
                designated as a geographic area for purposes of this 
                paragraph.
                    (B) Multi-state areas.--The Secretary may establish 
                geographic areas comprised of multiple contiguous 
                States only where the Secretary determines that volume 
                of activity or other relevant factors justifies such an 
                establishment.
            (3) Eligible applicants.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
        for the establishment of a quality improvement foundation under 
        paragraph (1), an applicant entity shall meet the following 
        conditions:
                    (A) Not-for-profit.--The entity shall be a not-for-
                profit entity operating within the State or region 
                involved.
                    (B) Board.--The entity shall have a board which 
                includes--
                            (i) representatives of health care 
                        providers from throughout the State or region 
                        involved, including both practicing providers 
                        and experts in the field of quality measurement 
                        and improvement, which together shall comprise 
                        at least one-fourth of the advisory board's 
                        membership;
                            (ii) at least one representative of 
                        Academic Health Centers or Schools of Public 
                        Health as defined in section 799 of the Public 
                        Health Service Act operating within the State 
                        or region involved (or operating outside of the 
                        State or region if no such Centers or schools 
                        operate within the State or region), which 
                        shall comprise up to one-fourth of the 
                        membership;
                            (iii) representatives of consumers residing 
                        within the State or region involved, who shall 
                        comprise one-fourth of the membership; and
                            (iv) representatives of purchasers of 
                        health care, health plans, and other interested 
                        parties residing within the State or region 
                        involved, and representatives of the State or 
                        States within a region.
                    (C) Staffing.--Each entity shall have sufficient, 
                competent staff of experts possessing the skills and 
                knowledge necessary to enable the foundation to perform 
                its duties.
    (c) Duties.--
            (1) In general.--Each quality improvement foundation shall 
        carry out the duties described in paragraph (2) for the State 
        or region in which the foundation is located. The foundation 
        shall establish a program of activities incorporating such 
        duties and shall be able to demonstrate the involvement of a 
        broad cross-section of the providers and health care 
        institutions throughout the State or region. A foundation may 
        apply for and conduct research described in section 5007.
            (2) Duties described.--The duties described in this 
        paragraph include the following:
                    (A) Collaboration with and technical assistance to 
                providers and health plans in ongoing efforts to 
                improve the quality of health care provided to 
                individuals in the State.
                    (B) Population-based monitoring of practice 
                patterns and patient outcomes,on an other than a case-
                by-case basis.
                    (C) Developing programs in lifetime learning for 
                health professionals to improve the quality of health 
                care by ensuring that health professionals remain 
                informed about new knowledge, acquire new skills, and 
                adopt new roles as technology and societal demands 
                change.
                    (D) Disseminating information about successful 
                quality improvement programs, practice guidelines, and 
                research findings, including information on innovative 
                staffing of health professionals.
                    (E) Assist in developing innovative patient 
                education systems that enhance patient involvement in 
                decisions relating to their health care, including an 
                emphasis on shared decisionmaking between patients and 
                health care providers.
                    (F) Issuing a report to the public regarding the 
                foundation's activities for the previous year including 
                areas of success during the previous year and areas for 
                opportunities in improving health outcomes for the 
                community, and the adoption of guidelines.
                    (G) Providing notice to the State or appropriate 
                entity if the foundation determines, after reasonable 
                opportunities for improvement, that the quality of a 
                provider or plan remains so inadequate that the 
                patients or enrollees of such a provider or plan are 
                subject to potential harm in utilizing the services of 
                such provider or services under such plan.
    (d) Restrictions on Disclosure.--The restrictions on disclosure of 
information under section 1160 of the Social Security Act shall apply 
to quality improvement foundations under this section, except that--
            (1) such foundations shall make data available to qualified 
        organizations and individuals for research for public benefit;
            (2) individuals and qualified organizations shall meet 
        standards consistent with the Public Health Service Act and 
        policies regarding the conduct of scientific research, 
        including provisions related to confidentiality, privacy, 
        protection of humans and shall pay reasonable costs for data; 
        and
            (3) such foundations may exchange information with other 
        quality improvement foundations.

SEC. 5009. CONSUMER INFORMATION AND ADVOCACY.

    (a) Establishment.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish (by grant or 
        contract) and oversee a National Center of Consumer Information 
        and Advocacy to provide technical assistance, adequate training 
        and support to States and Consumer Information and Advocacy 
        Centers in each State (hereafter referred to in this section as 
        the ``Center'') to carry out the duties of this section, 
        including providing public education to consumers concerning 
        this Act.
            (2) Requirements for national center.--The National Center 
        of Consumer Information and Advocacy shall be a national non-
        profit organization with public education and health policy 
        expertise and shall have sufficient staff to carry out its 
        duties and a demonstrated ability to represent and work with a 
        broad spectrum of consumers, including vulnerable and 
        underserved populations.
            (3) State-based centers.--The Consumer Information and 
        Advocacy Center in each State shall disseminate State reports 
        on quality performance (as defined in section 5005(4)) and 
        health plan consumer report cards (as defined in section 
        5005(2)) in order to facilitate consumer choice of health 
        plans, perform public outreach and provide education and 
        assistance regarding consumer rights and responsibilities under 
        this Act, and assist consumers in dealing with problems that 
        arise with consumer purchasing cooperatives, large group 
        purchasers, health plans, insurance agencies, and health care 
        providers operating in such State.
    (b) Contracts.--
            (1) Solicitation.--The Secretary shall solicit contracts 
        from private non-profit organizations based in each State to 
        fulfill the duties of the Center in the State. The Secretary 
        may develop such regulations and guidelines as necessary to 
        oversee the process of considering and awarding competitive 
        contracts under this section. In awarding such contracts, the 
        Secretary shall consult with the National Center of Consumer 
        Information and Advocacy and shall, at a minimum, consider the 
        demonstrated ability of the organization to represent and work 
        with a broad spectrum of consumers, including vulnerable and 
        underserved populations.
            (2) Contract period.--The contract period for the State-
        based Consumer Information and Advocacy Centers and the 
        National Center of Consumer Information and Advocacy under this 
        section shall be not less than 4 years and not more than 7 
        years.
    (c) Functions and Responsibilities.--
            (1) Dissemination of reports.--Each Center shall 
        disseminate State reports on quality performance (as defined in 
        section 5005(2)) and health plan consumer report cards (as 
        defined in section 5005(2)) in order to facilitate consumer 
        choice of health plans.
            (2) Staff, offices and hotlines.--Each Center shall have 
        sufficient staff, local offices throughout the State, and a 
        State-wide toll-free hotline to carry out the advocacy duties 
        of this section. Through direct contact and the hotline, the 
        Center shall provide the following services in the State, 
        including appropriate assistance to individuals with limited 
        English language ability--
                    (A) outreach and education relating to consumer 
                rights and responsibilities under this Act, including 
                such rights and services available through the Center;
                    (B) assistance with enrollment in health plans, or 
                obtaining services or reimbursement from health plans;
                    (C) assistance with filing an application for 
                premium or cost sharing subsidies;
                    (D) information to enrollees about existing 
                grievance procedures and coordination with other 
                entities to assist in identifying, investigating, and 
                resolving enrollee grievances under this Act (including 
                grievances before State medical boards);
                    (E) referrals to appropriate local providers of 
                legal assistance and to appropriate State and Federal 
                agencies which may be of assistance to aggrieved 
                individuals in the area; and
                    (F) conduct public hearings no less frequently than 
                once a year to identify and address community health 
                care needs.
    (d) Access to Information.--The Secretary and the States shall 
ensure that, for purposes of carrying out the Center's duties under 
this section, the Center (and officers and employees of the Center in 
local offices) have appropriate access to necessary information subject 
to protections for confidentiality of enrollee information. Each Center 
shall have the capability to accept electronic quality data from plans 
as required under subtitle B.
    (e) Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall have the right to 
evaluate the quality and effectiveness of the organization in carrying 
out the functions specified in the contract. The Center shall report to 
the Secretary and the State annually on the nature and patterns of 
consumer complaints received in the Center and its local offices during 
each year and any policy, regulatory, and legislative recommendations 
for needed improvements together with a record of the activities of the 
Center.
    (f) Conflicts of Interest.--The Secretary shall ensure that no 
individual involved in the designation of a State Center, the Center 
itself, or of any delegate thereof is subject to a conflict of 
interest, including affiliation with (through ownership or common 
control) a health care facility, managed care organization, health 
insurance company or association of health care facilities or 
providers. No grantee under this section may have a direct involvement 
with the licensing, certification, or accreditation of a health care 
facility, a health care plan, or a provider of health care services .
    (g) Legal Counsel.--The Secretary shall ensure that adequate legal 
counsel is available, and is able, without conflict of interest, to 
assist the Center, and the local offices thereof in the performance of 
their official duties.
    (h) Coordination.--The Center shall coordinate its activities with 
all appropriate entities including Quality Improvement Foundations 
(established under section 5008) and the State agencies designated to 
carry out client advocacy activities pursuant to section 2106.
    (i) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall replace grievance 
procedures established or otherwise required under this Act.

SEC. 5010. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) National Quality Council.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
subtitle with respect to the establishment and activities of the 
National Quality Council, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$4,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000.
    (b) Quality Improvement Foundations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out section 5008, the are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 
for fiscal year 1996, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and 
$300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000.
    (c) Consumer Information and Advocacy Centers.--For the purpose of 
carrying out section 5009, the are authorized to be appropriated 
$100,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
$300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000, of which 
$4,000,000 for each fiscal year shall be made available to the National 
Center of Consumer Information and Advocacy.

SEC. 5011. ROLE OF HEALTH PLANS IN QUALITY MANAGEMENT.

    Each health plan shall--
            (1) measure and disclose performance on quality measures as 
        designated by this Act;
            (2) furnish information required under subtitles B and of 
        this title and provide such other reports and information on 
        the quality of care delivered by health care providers who are 
        members of a provider network of the plan as may be required 
        under this Act; and
            (3) maintain quality management systems that--
                    (A) use the national measures of quality 
                performance developed by the National Quality Council 
                under section 5003; and
                    (B) measure the quality of health care furnished to 
                enrollees under the plan by all health care providers 
                of the plan where practical.

SEC. 5012. INFORMATION ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    (a) State Obligations.--Each State shall make available to 
consumers, upon request, information concerning providers of health 
care services or supplies. Such information shall include--
            (1) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
        under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
        fraud, corruption, breach of fiduciary responsibility, or other 
        financial misconduct in connection with the delivery of a 
        health care service or supply;
            (2) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
        under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
        neglect or abuse of patients in connection with the delivery of 
        a health care service or supply;
            (3) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
        under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
        the unlawful manufacture, distribution, prescription, or 
        dispensing of a controlled substance; and
            (4) the identity of any provider whose license to provide 
        health care services or supplies has been revoked, suspended, 
        restricted, or not renewed, by a State licensing authority for 
        reasons relating to the provider's professional competence, 
        professional performance, or financial integrity, or any 
        provider who surrendered such a license while a formal 
        disciplinary proceeding was pending before such an authority, 
        if the proceeding concerned the provider's professional 
        competence, professional performance, or financial integrity.
    (b) Public Availability of Information in National Practitioner 
Data Bank on Defendants, Awards, and Settlements.--
            (1) In general.--Section 427(a) of the Health Care Quality 
        Improvement Act (42 U.S.C. 11137 (a)) is amended by adding at 
        the end the following new sentence: ``Not later the January 1, 
        1996, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which 
        individuals seeking to enroll in health plans under the Health 
        Security Act shall be able to obtain information reported under 
        this part with respect to physicians and other licensed health 
        practitioners participating in such plans for whom information 
        has been reported under this part on repeated occasions.''.
            (2) Access to data bank for point-of-service contractors 
        under medicare.--Section 427(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        11137(a)) is amended--
                    (A) by inserting ``to sponsors of point-of-service 
                networks under section 1990 of the Social Security 
                Act,'', and
                    (B) in the heading, by inserting ``Related'' after 
                ``Care''.

SEC. 5013. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

    Title IX of the Public Health Service Act is amended--
            (1) in section 903(a)(4) (42 U.S.C. 299a-1(a)(4)), by 
        inserting ``and Quality Improvement Foundations'' after 
        ``health agencies'';
            (2) in section 904(c)(1) (42 U.S.C. 299a-2(c)(1)), by 
        inserting ``the National Quality Council and'' after ``in 
        consultation with'';
            (3) in section 912(b)(4) (42 U.S.C. 299b-1(b)(4))--
                    (A) by inserting ``outcomes,'' before ``risks''; 
                and
                    (B) by inserting before the semicolon ``to the 
                extent feasible given the availability of unbiased, 
                reliable, and valid data'';
            (4) in section 914 (42 U.S.C. 299b-3)--
                    (A) in subsection (a)(2)(B)--
                            (i) by inserting ``the National Quality 
                        Council,'' after ``shall consult with''; and
                            (ii) by inserting before the period ``and 
                        relevant sections of the Health Security Act'';
                    (B) in subsection (c), by inserting ``Quality 
                Improvement Foundations and other'' after ``carried out 
                through''; and
                    (C) in subsection (f)--
                            (i) by striking ``to Administrator'' in the 
                        subsection heading;
                            (ii) by striking ``Administrator'' and 
                        inserting ``National Quality Council and the''; 
                        and
            (5) in section 927 (42 U.S.C. 299c-6), by adding at the end 
        thereof the following new paragraphs:
            ``(5) The term `National Quality Council' means the Council 
        established under section 5001 of the Health Security Act.
            ``(6) The term ``Quality Improvement Foundations'' means 
        the Foundations established under section 5008 of the Health 
        Security Act.''.

               Subtitle B--Administrative Simplification

                    PART 1--PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS

SEC. 5101. PURPOSE.

    It is the purpose of this subtitle to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the health care system, including the medicare program 
under title XVIII of the Social Security Act and the medicaid program 
under title XIX of such Act, by encouraging the development of a health 
information network through the establishment of standards and 
requirements for the electronic transmission of certain health 
information.

SEC. 5102. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) Code set.--The term ``code set'' means any set of codes 
        used for encoding data elements, such as tables of terms, 
        medical concepts, medical diagnostic codes, or medical 
        procedure codes.
            (2) Coordination of benefits.--The term ``coordination of 
        benefits'' means determining and coordinating the financial 
        obligations of health plans when health care benefits are 
        payable under 2 or more health plans.
            (3) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
        provider'' includes a provider of services (as defined in 
        section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act), a provider of 
        medical or other health services (as defined in section 1861(s) 
        of the Social Security Act), and any other person furnishing 
        health care services or supplies.
            (4) Health information.--The term ``health information'' 
        means any information, whether oral or recorded in any form or 
        medium that--
                    (A) is created or received by a health care 
                provider, health plan, health oversight agency (as 
                defined in section 5202), health researcher, public 
                health authority (as defined in section 5202), 
                employer, life insurer, school or university, or health 
                information network service certified under section 
                5141; and
                    (B) relates to the past, present, or future 
                physical or mental health or condition of an 
                individual, the provision of health care to an 
                individual, or the past, present, or future payment for 
                the provision of health care to an individual.
            (5) Health information network.--The term ``health 
        information network'' means the health information system that 
        is formed through the application of the requirements and 
        standards established under this subtitle.
            (6) Health information protection organization.--The term 
        ``health information protection organization'' means a private 
        entity or an entity operated by a State that accesses standard 
        data elements of health information through the health 
        information network, processes such information into non-
        identifiable health information, and may store such 
        information.
            (7) Health information network service.--The term ``health 
        information network service''--
                    (A) means a private entity or an entity operated by 
                a State that enters into contracts to--
                            (i) process or facilitate the processing of 
                        nonstandard data elements of health information 
                        into standard data elements;
                            (ii) provide the means by which persons are 
                        connected to the health information network for 
                        purposes of meeting the requirements of this 
                        subtitle, including the holding of standard 
                        data elements of health information;
                            (iii) provide authorized access to health 
                        information through the health information 
                        network; or
                            (iv) provide specific information 
                        processing services, such as automated 
                        coordination of benefits and claims transaction 
                        routing; and
                    (B) includes a health information protection 
                organization.
            (8) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' has the meaning 
        given such term in section 1011(1)(A) except that such term 
        shall include clauses (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), and (viii) of 
        such section.
            (9) Non-identifiable health information.--The term ``non-
        identifiable health information'' means health information that 
        is not protected health information as defined in section 5202.
            (10) Health researcher.--The term ``health researcher'' 
        shall have the meaning given such term under section 5202.
            (11) Patient medical record information.--The term 
        ``patient medical record information'' means health information 
        derived from a clinical encounter that relates to the physical 
        or mental condition of an individual.
            (12) Standard.--The term ``standard'' when referring to an 
        information transaction or to data elements of health 
        information means the transaction or data elements meet any 
        standard adopted by the Secretary under part 2 that applies to 
        such information transaction or data elements.

    PART 2--STANDARDS FOR DATA ELEMENTS AND INFORMATION TRANSACTIONS

SEC. 5111. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ON SECRETARY.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall adopt standards and 
modifications to standards under this subtitle that are--
            (1) consistent with the objective of reducing the costs of 
        providing and paying for health care; and
            (2) in use and generally accepted or developed or modified 
        by the standards setting organizations accredited by the 
        American National Standard Institute (ANSI).
    (b) Initial Standards.--The Secretary may develop an expedited 
process for the adoption of initial standards under this subtitle.
    (c) Failsafe.--If the Secretary is unable to adopt standards or 
modified standards in accordance with subsection (a) that meet the 
requirements of this subtitle--
            (1) the Secretary may develop or modify such standards and, 
        after providing public notice and after an adequate period for 
        public comment, adopt such standards; and
            (2) if the Secretary adopts standards under paragraph (1), 
        the Secretary shall submit a report to the appropriate 
        committees of Congress on the actions taken by the Secretary 
        under this subsection.
    (d) Paper Formats.--The Secretary may develop methods by which a 
person may use the standards adopted by the Secretary under this 
subtitle with respect to health information that is in written rather 
than electronic form.

SEC. 5112. STANDARDS FOR DATA ELEMENTS OF HEALTH INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall adopt standards necessary to 
make data elements of the following health information uniform and 
compatible for electronic transmission through the health information 
network:
            (1) the health information that is appropriate for 
        transmission in connection with transactions described in 
        subsections (a), (b), and (d) of section 5121;
            (2) the quality information required to be submitted by a 
        health plan under title I and subtitle A of this title; and
            (3) patient medical record information.
    (b) Additions.--The Secretary may make additions to the sets of 
data elements adopted under subsection (a) as the Secretary determines 
appropriate in a manner that minimizes the disruption and cost of 
compliance with such additions.
    (c) Certain Data Elements.--
            (1) Unique health identifiers.--The Secretary shall 
        establish a system to provide for a standard unique health 
        identifier for each individual, employer, health plan, and 
        health care provider for use in the health care system. The 
        personal health identifier for an individual shall be an 
        encrypted form of the social security account number assigned 
        to the individual by the Secretary under section 205(c)(2) of 
        the Social Security Act.
            (2) Code sets.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation 
                with experts from the private sector and Federal 
                agencies, shall--
                            (i) select code sets for appropriate data 
                        elements from among the code sets that have 
                        been developed by private and public entities; 
                        or
                            (ii) establish code sets for such data 
                        elements if no code sets for the data elements 
                        have been developed.
                    (B) Distribution.--The Secretary shall establish 
                efficient and low-cost procedures for distribution of 
                code sets and modifications to such code sets under 
                section 5115(c).

SEC. 5113. INFORMATION TRANSACTION STANDARDS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall adopt technical standards 
relating to the method by which data elements of health information 
that have been standardized under section 5112 may be transmitted 
electronically, including standards with respect to the format in which 
such data elements shall be transmitted.
    (b) Special Rule for Coordination of Benefits.--Any standards 
adopted by the Secretary under paragraph (1) that relate to 
coordination of benefits shall provide that a claim for reimbursement 
for medical services furnished is tested by an algorithm specified by 
the Secretary against all records of enrollment and eligibility for the 
individual who received such services to determine any primary and 
secondary obligors for payment.
    (c) Electronic Signature.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Commerce, shall promulgate regulations specifying 
procedures for the electronic transmission and authentication of 
signatures, compliance with which will be deemed to satisfy State and 
Federal statutory requirements for written signatures with respect to 
information transactions required by this Act and written signatures on 
medical records and prescriptions.

SEC. 5114. STANDARDS RELATING TO WRITTEN CLAIMS SUBMITTED BY 
              INDIVIDUALS AND WRITTEN EXPLANATIONS OF BENEFITS.

    The Secretary shall adopt standard methods and formats which--
            (1) may be used by an individual to submit a written claim 
        when the individual's health care provider does not submit the 
        claim; and
            (2) shall be used by health plans to submit a written 
        explanation of benefits to an enrollee.

SEC. 5115. TIMETABLES FOR ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.

    (a) Initial Standards for Data Elements.--The Secretary shall adopt 
standards relating to--
            (1) the data elements for the information described in 
        section 5112(a)(1) not later than 9 months after the date of 
        the enactment of this subtitle (except in the case of standards 
        with respect to data elements for claims attachments which 
        shall be adopted not later than 24 months after the date of the 
        enactment of this subtitle);
            (2) the data elements for the information described in 
        section 5112(a)(2) not later than 9 months after the date of 
        the enactment of this subtitle;
            (3) data elements for patient medical record information 
        not earlier than 24 months and not later than 7 years after the 
        date of the enactment of this subtitle; and
            (4) any addition to a set of data elements, in conjunction 
        with making such an addition.
    (b) Initial Standards for Information Transactions.--The Secretary 
shall adopt standards relating to information transactions under 
section 5113 not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of 
this subtitle (except in the case of standards for claims attachments 
which shall be adopted not later than 24 months after the date of the 
enactment of this subtitle).
    (c) Standards for Written Claims and Explanations of Benefits.--The 
Secretary shall adopt standard methods and formats described in section 
5114 not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this 
subtitle.
    (d) Modifications to Standards.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        Secretary shall review the standards adopted under this 
        subtitle and shall adopt modified standards as determined 
        appropriate, but no more frequently than once every 6 months. 
        Any modification to standards shall be completed in a manner 
        which minimizes the disruption and cost of compliance.
            (2) Special rules.--
                    (A) Modifications during first 12-month period.--
                Except with respect to additions and modifications to 
                code sets under subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall 
                not adopt any modifications to standards adopted under 
                this subtitle during the 12-month period beginning on 
                the date such standards are adopted unless the 
                Secretary determines that a modification is necessary 
                in order to permit compliance with requirements 
                relating to the standards.
                    (B) Additions and modifications to code sets.--
                            (i) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure 
                        that procedures exist for the routine 
                        maintenance, testing, enhancement, and 
                        expansion of code sets to accommodate changes 
                        in biomedical science and health care delivery.
                            (ii) Additional Rules.--If a code set is 
                        modified under this subsection, the modified 
                        code set shall include instructions on how data 
                        elements that were encoded prior to the 
                        modification are to be converted or translated 
                        so as to preserve the value of the data 
                        elements. Any modification to a code set under 
                        this subsection shall be implemented in a 
                        manner that minimizes the disruption and cost 
                        of complying with such modification.
    (e) Evaluation of Standards.--The Secretary may establish a process 
to measure or verify the consistency of standards adopted or modified 
under this subtitle. Such process may include demonstration projects 
and analysis of the cost of implementing such standards and 
modifications.

     PART 3--REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS AND 
                              INFORMATION

SEC. 5121. REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS AND 
              INFORMATION.

    (a) Requirements on Plans and Providers Relating to Financial and 
Administrative Transactions.--If a health care provider or a health 
plan conducts any of the following transactions, such transactions 
shall be standard transactions and the information transmitted or 
received in connection with such transaction shall be in the form of 
standard data elements:
            (1) Claims (including coordination of benefits).
            (2) Claims attachments.
            (3) Responses to research inquiries by a health researcher.
            (4) Other transactions determined appropriate by the 
        Secretary consistent with the goal of reducing administrative 
        costs.
    (b) Requirement Only on Plans Relating to Financial and 
Administrative Transactions.--If a person desires to conduct any of the 
following transactions with a health plan as a standard transaction, 
the health plan shall conduct such standard transaction and the 
information transmitted or received in connection with such transaction 
shall be in the form of standard data elements:
            (1) Enrollment and disenrollment.
            (2) Eligibility.
            (3) Payment and remittance advice.
            (4) Premium payments.
            (5) First report of injury.
            (6) Claims status.
            (7) Referral certification and authorization.
            (8) Other transactions determined appropriate by the 
        Secretary consistent with the goal of reducing administrative 
        costs.
    (c) Requirement on Plans Relating to Quality Information.--Any 
quality information required to be submitted by a health plan under 
title I or subtitle A of this title shall be in the form of standard 
data elements and the transmission of such data shall be in the form of 
a standard transaction.
    (d) Requirement Only on Purchasing Cooperatives.--If a person 
desires to conduct any of the following transactions with a purchasing 
cooperative (as defined in section 1013(12)) as a standard transaction, 
the cooperative shall conduct such standard transaction and the 
information transmitted or received in connection with such transaction 
shall be in the form of standard data elements:
            (1) Enrollment and disenrollment.
            (2) Premium payments.
    (e) Requirement with Respect to Disclosure of Information.--
            (1) In general.--A health plan or health care provider 
        shall make the standard data elements transmitted or received 
        by such plan or provider in connection with the transactions 
        described in subsections (a), (b), and (c) or acquired under 
        section 5164(a) available for disclosure as authorized by this 
        subtitle.
            (2) Special rule.--In the case of a health care provider 
        that does not file claims, such provider shall be responsible 
        for making standard data elements for encounter information 
        available for disclosure as authorized by this subtitle.
    (f) Satisfaction of Requirements.--A health care provider, health 
plan, or consumer purchasing cooperative may satisfy the requirement 
imposed on such provider, plan, or cooperative under subsection (a), 
(b), (c), (d), or (e) by--
            (1) directly transmitting standard data elements;
            (2) submitting nonstandard data elements to a health 
        information network service certified under section 5141 for 
        processing into standard data elements and transmission; or
            (3) in the case of a provider, submitting data elements to 
        a plan which satisfies the requirements imposed on such 
        provider on the provider's behalf.
    (g) Timeliness.--A health care provider or health plan shall be 
determined to have satisfied a requirement imposed under this section 
only if the action required is completed in a timely manner, as 
determined by the Secretary. In setting standards for timeliness, the 
Secretary shall take into consideration the age and the amount of 
information being requested.

SEC. 5122. TIMETABLES FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS.

    (a) Initial Compliance.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date on 
        which standards are adopted under part 2 with respect to a type 
        of transaction or data elements for a type of health 
        information, a health plan, health care provider, or purchasing 
        cooperative shall comply with the requirements of this subtitle 
        with respect to such transaction or information.
            (2) Additional data elements.--Not later than 12 months 
        after the date on which the Secretary adopts an addition to a 
        set of data elements for health information under part 2, a 
        health plan, health care provider, or purchasing cooperative 
        shall comply with the requirements of this subtitle using such 
        data elements.
    (b) Compliance with Modified Standards.--
            (1) In general.--If the Secretary adopts a modified 
        standard under part 2, a health plan, health care provider, or 
        purchasing cooperative shall be required to comply with the 
        modified standard at such time as the Secretary determines 
        appropriate taking into account the time needed to comply due 
        to the nature and extent of the modification.
            (2) Special rule.--In the case of modifications to 
        standards that do not occur within the 12-month period 
        beginning on the date such standards are adopted, the time 
        determined appropriate by the Secretary under paragraph (1) 
        shall be no sooner than the last day of the 90-day period 
        beginning on the date such modified standard is adopted and no 
        later than the last day of the 12 month period beginning on the 
        date such modified standard is adopted.

                  PART 4--ACCESSING HEALTH INFORMATION

SEC. 5131. ACCESSING HEALTH INFORMATION FOR AUTHORIZED PURPOSES.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall adopt technical standards for 
appropriate persons, including health plans, health care providers, 
health information network services certified under section 5141, 
health researchers, and Federal and State agencies, to locate and 
access the health information that is available through the health 
information network due to the requirements of this subtitle. Such 
technical standards shall ensure that any request to locate or access 
information shall be authorized under subtitle C.
    (b) Procurement Rule for Government Agencies.--
            (1) In general.--Health information protection 
        organizations certified under section 5141 shall make available 
        to a Federal or State agency pursuant to a Federal Acquisition 
        Regulation (or an equivalent State system), any non-
        identifiable health information that is requested by such 
        agency.
            (2) Certain information available at low cost.--If a health 
        information protection organization described in paragraph (1) 
        needs information from a health plan or health care provider in 
        order to comply with a request of a Federal or State agency 
        that is necessary to comply with a requirement under this Act, 
        such plan or provider shall make such information available to 
        such organization for a charge that does not exceed the 
        reasonable cost of transmitting the information. If requested, 
        a health information protection organization that receives 
        information under the preceding sentence must make such 
        information available to any other such organization that is 
        certified under section 5141 for a charge that does not exceed 
        the reasonable cost of transmitting the information.
    (c) Functional Separation.--The standards adopted by the Secretary 
under subsection (a) shall ensure that any health information disclosed 
under such subsection shall not, after such disclosure, be used or 
released for an administrative, regulatory, or law enforcement purpose 
unless such disclosure was made for such purpose.
    (d) Public Use Functions.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
construed to limit the authority of a Federal or State agency to make 
non-identifiable health information available for public use functions.

SEC. 5132. RESPONDING TO ACCESS REQUESTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may adopt, and modify as 
appropriate, standards under which a health care provider or health 
plan shall respond to requests for access to health information 
consistent with this subtitle and subtitle C.
    (b) Standards Described.--The standards under subsection (a) shall 
provide--
            (1) for a standard format under which a provider or plan 
        will respond to each request either by satisfying the request 
        or responding with an explanation of the specific restriction 
        which results in a failure to satisfy the request; and
            (2) that any restrictions will not prevent a plan or 
        provider from responding to a request in a timely manner taking 
        into account the age and amount of the information being 
        requested.
    (c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
permitting a health care provider or health plan to refuse to disclose 
any health information that is required to be disclosed by law.

SEC. 5133. LENGTH OF TIME INFORMATION SHOULD BE ACCESSIBLE.

    The Secretary shall adopt standards with respect to the length of 
time any standard data elements for a type of health information should 
be accessible through the health information network.

SEC. 5134. TIMETABLES FOR ADOPTION OF STANDARDS AND COMPLIANCE.

    (a) Initial Standards.--The Secretary shall adopt standards under 
this part not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of 
this subtitle and such standards shall be effective upon adoption.
    (b) Modifications to Standards.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        Secretary shall review the standards adopted under this part 
        and shall adopt modified standards as determined appropriate, 
        but no more frequently than once every 6 months. Any 
        modification to standards shall be completed in a manner which 
        minimizes the disruption and cost of compliance. Any 
        modifications to standards adopted under this part shall be 
        effective upon adoption.
            (2) Special rule.--The Secretary shall not adopt 
        modifications to any standards adopted under this part during 
        the 12-month period beginning on the date such standards are 
        adopted unless the Secretary determines that a modification is 
        necessary in order to permit compliance with the requirements 
        of this part.

   PART 5--STANDARDS AND CERTIFICATION FOR HEALTH INFORMATION NETWORK

SEC. 5141. STANDARDS AND CERTIFICATION FOR HEALTH INFORMATION NETWORK 
              SERVICES.

    (a) Standards for Operation.--The Secretary shall establish 
standards with respect to the operation of health information network 
services, including standards ensuring that--
            (1) such services develop, operate, and cooperate with one 
        another to form the health information network;
            (2) such services meet all of the requirements under 
        subtitle C that are applicable to such services;
            (3) such services make public information concerning their 
        performance, as measured by uniform indicators such as 
        accessibility, transaction responsiveness, administrative 
        efficiency, reliability, dependability, and any other indicator 
        determined appropriate by the Secretary;
            (4) such services have security procedures that are 
        consistent with the privacy requirements under subtitle C, 
        including secure methods of access to and transmission of data;
            (5) such services, if they are part of a larger 
        organization, have policies and procedures in place which 
        isolate their activities with respect to processing information 
        in a manner that prevents access to such information by such 
        larger organization.
    (b) Certification by the Secretary.--
            (1) Establishment.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
        of the enactment of this subtitle, the Secretary shall 
        establish a certification procedure for health information 
        network services which ensures that certified services are 
        qualified to meet the requirements of this subtitle and the 
        standards established by the Secretary under this section. Such 
        certification procedure shall be implemented in a manner that 
        minimizes the costs and delays of operations for such services.
            (2) Application.--Each entity desiring to be certified as a 
        health information network service shall apply to the Secretary 
        for certification in a form and manner determined appropriate 
        by the Secretary.
            (3) Audits and reports.--The procedure established under 
        paragraph (1) shall provide for audits by the Secretary and 
        reports by an entity certified under this section as the 
        Secretary determines appropriate in order to monitor such 
        entity's compliance with the requirements of this subtitle, 
        subtitle C, and the standards established by the Secretary 
        under this section.
            (4) Recertification.--A health information network service 
        must be recertified under this subsection at least every 3 
        years.
    (c) Loss of Certification.--
            (1) Mandatory termination.--Except as provided in paragraph 
        (3), if a health information network service violates a 
        requirement imposed on such service under subtitle C, its 
        certification under this section shall be terminated unless the 
        Secretary determines that appropriate corrective action has 
        been taken.
            (2) Discretionary termination.--If a health information 
        network service violates a requirement or standard imposed 
        under this subtitle and a penalty has been imposed under 
        section 5151, the Secretary shall review the certification of 
        such service and may terminate such certification.
            (3) Conditional certification--The Secretary may establish 
        a procedure under which a health information network service 
        may remain certified on a conditional basis if the service is 
        operating consistently with a plan intended to correct any 
        violations described in paragraphs (1) or (2). Such procedure 
        may provide for the appointment of a trustee to continue 
        operation of the service until the requirements for full 
        certification are met.
    (d) Certification by Private Entities.--The Secretary may designate 
private entities to conduct the certification procedures established by 
the Secretary under this section. A health information network service 
certified by such an entity in accordance with such designation shall 
be considered to be certified by the Secretary.

SEC. 5142. ENSURING AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION.

    The Secretary shall establish a procedure under which a health plan 
or health care provider which does not have the ability to transmit 
standard data elements directly or does not have access to a health 
information network service certified under section 5141 shall be able 
to make health information available for disclosure as authorized by 
this subtitle.

                           PART 6--PENALTIES

SEC. 5151. GENERAL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REQUIREMENTS AND 
              STANDARDS.

    (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
Secretary shall impose on any person that violates a requirement or 
standard imposed under this subtitle a penalty of not more than $1,000 
for each violation. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social 
Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b) and the second 
sentence of subsection (f)) shall apply to the imposition of a civil 
money penalty under this subsection in the same manner as such 
provisions apply to the imposition of a penalty under section 1128A of 
such Act.
    (b) Limitations.--
            (1) Noncompliance not discovered exercising reasonable 
        diligence.--A penalty may not be imposed under subsection (a) 
        if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary that 
        the person liable for the penalty did not know, and by 
        exercising reasonable diligence would not have known, that such 
        person failed to comply with the requirement or standard 
        described in subsection (a).
            (2) Failures due to reasonable cause.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as provided in 
                subparagraphs (B) and (C), a penalty may not be imposed 
                under subsection (a) if--
                            (i) the failure to comply was due to 
                        reasonable cause and not to willful neglect; 
                        and
                            (ii) the failure to comply is corrected 
                        during the 30-day period beginning on the 1st 
                        date the person liable for the penalty knew, or 
                        by exercising reasonable diligence would have 
                        known, that the failure to comply occurred.
                    (B) Extension of period.--
                            (i) No penalty.--The period referred to in 
                        subparagraph (A)(ii) may be extended as 
                        determined appropriate by the Secretary based 
                        on the nature and extent of the failure to 
                        comply.
                            (ii) Assistance.--If the Secretary 
                        determines that a health plan, health care 
                        provider, or purchasing cooperative failed to 
                        comply because such person was unable to 
                        comply, the Secretary may provide technical 
                        assistance to such person. Such assistance 
                        shall be provided in any manner determined 
                        appropriate by the Secretary.
            (3) Reduction.--In the case of a failure to comply which is 
        due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, any penalty 
        under subsection (a) that is not entirely waived under 
        paragraph (2) may be waived to the extent that the payment of 
        such penalty would be excessive relative to the compliance 
        failure involved.

                    PART 7--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 5161. IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.

    (a) Data Element Standards.--A person may not impose a standard on 
another person that is in addition to the standards adopted by the 
Secretary under section 5112 unless--
            (1) such person voluntarily agrees to such standard; or
            (2) a waiver is granted under subsection (c) to impose such 
        standard.
    (b) Transactions and Access Standards.--A person may not impose a 
standard on another person that is in addition to the standards adopted 
by the Secretary under section 5113 or 5131 unless such person 
voluntarily agrees to such standard.
    (c) Conditions for Waivers.--
            (1) In general.--A person may request a waiver from the 
        Secretary in order to require another person to comply with a 
        standard that is in addition to the standards adopted by the 
        Secretary under section 5112.
            (2) Consideration of waiver requests.--No waiver may be 
        granted unless the Secretary determines that the value of the 
        data to be exchanged for research or other purposes 
        significantly outweighs the administrative cost of the 
        additional standard taking into consideration the burden of the 
        timing of the imposition of the additional standard.
            (3) Anonymous reporting.--If a person attempts to impose a 
        standard in addition to the standards adopted by the Secretary 
        under section 5112, the person on whom such additional standard 
        is being imposed may contact the Secretary. The Secretary shall 
        develop a procedure under which the contacting person shall 
        remain anonymous. The Secretary shall notify the person 
        imposing the additional standard that the additional standard 
        may not be imposed unless the other person voluntarily agrees 
        to such standard or a waiver is obtained under this subsection.

SEC. 5162. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.

    (a) In General.--A provision, requirement, or standard under this 
subtitle shall supersede any contrary provision of State law, 
including--
            (1) a provision of State law that requires medical or 
        health plan records (including billing information) to be 
        maintained or transmitted in written rather than electronic 
        form, and
            (2) a provision of State law which provides for 
        requirements or standards that are more stringent than the 
        requirements or standards under this subtitle;
except where the Secretary determines that the provision is necessary 
to prevent fraud and abuse, with respect to controlled substances, or 
for other purposes.
    (b) Public Health Reporting.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
construed to invalidate or limit the authority, power, or procedures 
established under any law providing for the reporting of disease or 
injury, child abuse, birth, or death, public health surveillance, or 
public health investigation or intervention.

SEC. 5164. HEALTH INFORMATION CONTINUITY.

    (a) Information Held by Health Plans and Providers.--If a health 
plan or health care provider takes any action that would threaten the 
continued availability of the standard data elements of health 
information held by such plan or provider, such data elements shall be 
obtained by the State in which such plan or provider is located. The 
State shall ensure that such data elements are transferred to a health 
plan or health care provider in accordance with procedures established 
by the Secretary.
    (b) Information Held by Health Information Network Services.--If a 
health information network service certified under section 5141 loses 
its certified status or takes any action that would threaten the 
continued availability of the standard data elements of health 
information held by such service, such data elements shall be 
transferred to another health information network service certified 
under section 5141, as designated by the Secretary.

SEC. 5165. PROTECTION OF COMMERCIAL INFORMATION.

    In adopting standards under this subtitle, the Secretary shall not 
require disclosure of trade secrets and confidential commercial 
information by entities operating in the health information network 
except as required by law.

SEC. 5166. PAYMENT FOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES OR HEALTH PLAN PREMIUMS.

    Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to prohibit payments 
for health care services or health plan premiums from being made by 
debit, credit, or other payment cards or numbers or other electronic 
payment means.

SEC. 5167. HEALTH SECURITY CARDS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish standards relating 
to the form of health security cards issued by health plans and the 
information to be encoded electronically on such cards.
    (b) Form Described.--The standard form for a health security card 
shall be a card which--
            (1) is made of plastic or a similar durable material with a 
        useful life of at least 5 years;
            (2) is resistant to counterfeiting;
            (3) can store information that can be encoded and retrieved 
        electronically;
            (4) can be produced in a cost-effective manner and used in 
        all types of health care locations; and
            (5) specifies on its face the social security account 
        number assigned to the individual who is the cardholder by the 
        Secretary under section 205(c)(2) of the Social Security Act.
    (b) Information Described.--The information electronically encoded 
on a health security card shall include the identity of the individual 
to whom the card was issued, including such individual's personal 
health identifier specified under section 5112(c)(1), and may include 
any other information that the Secretary determines may be useful in 
order for the card to serve the purpose of easing access to and paying 
for health care services. A health plan shall make available to an 
individual cardholder, upon demand by such individual, a printed copy 
of all information electronically encoded on such individual's health 
security card.

SEC. 5168. MISUSE OF HEALTH SECURITY CARD OR PERSONAL HEALTH 
              IDENTIFIER.

    (a) Health Security Card.--A person who--
            (1) requires the display of, requires the use of, or uses a 
        health security card for any purpose other than obtaining or 
        paying for health care;
            (2) falsely makes, forges, counterfeits or alters a health 
        security card;
            (3) without lawful authority prints, photographs, or makes 
        any impression in the likeness of any health security card; or
            (4) sells, transfers, or otherwise delivers a false, 
        forged, counterfeited, or altered health security card knowing 
        that the card is false, forged, counterfeited, or altered;
shall be fined not more than $25,000, imprisoned not more than 2 years, 
or both.
    (b) Personal Health Identifier.--A person who requires the 
disclosure of, requires the use of, or uses an individual's personal 
health identifier for any purpose that is not authorized by the 
Secretary, shall be fined not more than $25,000, imprisoned not more 
than 2 years, or both.

SEC. 5169. DIRECT BILLING FOR CLINICAL LABORATORY SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Requirement.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), in 
        the case of a claim for payment for a clinical diagnostic 
        laboratory test for which payment may otherwise be made, 
        payment may be made only to the person who, or entity which, 
        performed or supervised the test.
            (2) Exception.--Payment for a clinical diagnostic 
        laboratory test may be made to a physician with whom the 
        physician who performed the test shares a practice.
    (b) Additional Exceptions.--The Secretary may, by regulation, 
establish exceptions to the requirement under subsection (a)(1) that 
are in addition to the exception under subsection (a)(2). In 
establishing such exceptions the Secretary shall take into account--
            (1) circumstances in which an individual's privacy might be 
        violated; or
            (2) the need for confidentiality on the part of the person 
        furnishing the test.

SEC. 5170. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary to carry out the purposes of this subtitle.

                  PART 8--ASSISTANCE TO THE SECRETARY

SEC. 5171. GENERAL REQUIREMENT ON SECRETARY.

    In complying with any requirements imposed under this subtitle, the 
Secretary shall rely on recommendations of the Health Information 
Advisory Committee established under section 5172 and shall consult 
with appropriate Federal agencies.

SEC. 5172. HEALTH INFORMATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

    (a) Establishment.--There is established a committee to be known as 
the Health Care Information Advisory Committee.
    (b) Duty.--
            (1) In general.--The committee shall--
                    (A) provide assistance to the Secretary in 
                complying with the requirements imposed on the 
                Secretary under this subtitle and subtitle C;
                    (B) be generally responsible for advising the 
                Secretary and the Congress on the status of the health 
                information network; and
                    (C) make recommendations to correct any problems 
                that may occur in the network's implementation and 
                ongoing operations and to refine and improve the 
                network.
            (2) Technical assistance.--In performing its duties under 
        this subsection, the committee shall receive technical 
        assistance from appropriate Federal agencies.
    (c) Membership.--
            (1) In general.--The committee shall consist of 15 members 
        to be appointed by the President not later than 60 days after 
        the date of the enactment of this subtitle. The President shall 
        designate 1 member as the Chair.
            (2) Expertise.--The membership of the committee shall 
        consist of individuals who are of recognized standing and 
        distinction and who possess the demonstrated capacity to 
        discharge the duties imposed on the committee.
            (3) Terms.--Each member of the committee shall be appointed 
        for a term of 5 years, except that the members first appointed 
        shall serve staggered terms such that the terms of no more than 
        3 members expire at one time.
            (4) Vacancies.--
                    (A) In general.--A vacancy on the committee shall 
                be filled in the manner in which the original 
                appointment was made and shall be subject to any 
                conditions which applied with respect to the original 
                appointment.
                    (B) Filling unexpired term.--An individual chosen 
                to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired 
                term of the member replaced.
                    (C) Expiration of terms.--The term of any member 
                shall not expire before the date on which the member's 
                successor takes office.
            (5) Conflicts of interest.--Members of the committee shall 
        disclose upon appointment to the committee or at any subsequent 
        time that it may occur, conflicts of interest.
    (d) Meetings.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        committee shall meet at the call of the Chair.
            (2) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
        on which all members of the committee have been appointed, the 
        committee shall hold its first meeting.
            (3) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the committee 
        shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may 
        hold hearings.
    (e) Power To Hold Hearings.--The committee may hold such hearings, 
sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive 
such evidence as the committee considers advisable to carry out the 
purposes of this section.
    (f) Other Administrative Provisions.--Subparagraphs (C), (D), and 
(H) of section 1886(e)(6) of the Social Security Act shall apply to the 
committee in the same manner as they apply to the Prospective Payment 
Assessment Commission.
    (g) Reports.--
            (1) In general.--The committee shall annually prepare and 
        submit to Congress and the Secretary a report including at 
        least an analysis of--
                    (A) the status of the health information network 
                established under this subtitle, including whether the 
                network is fulfilling the purpose described in section 
                5101;
                    (B) the savings and costs of the network;
                    (C) the activities of health information network 
                services certified under section 5141, health care 
                providers, health plans, and other entities using the 
                network to exchange health information;
                    (D) the extent to which entities described in 
                subparagraph (C) are meeting the standards adopted 
                under this subtitle and working together to form an 
                integrated network that meets the needs of its users;
                    (E) the extent to which entities described in 
                subparagraph (C) are meeting the privacy and security 
                protections of subtitle C;
                    (F) the number and types of penalties assessed for 
                noncompliance with the standards adopted under this 
                subtitle;
                    (G) whether the Federal Government and State 
                Governments are receiving information of sufficient 
                quality to meet their responsibilities under the Health 
                Security Act;
                    (H) any problems with respect to implementation of 
                the network;
                    (I) the extent to which timetables under this 
                subtitle for the adoption and implementation of 
                standards are being met; and
                    (J) any legislative recommendations related to the 
                health information network.
            (2) Availability to the public.--Any information in the 
        report submitted to Congress under paragraph (1) shall be made 
        available to the public unless such information may not be 
        disclosed by law.
    (h) Duration.--Notwithstanding section 14(a) of the Federal 
Advisory Committee Act, the committee shall continue in existence until 
otherwise provided by law.
    (i) Authorization of Appropriations.--
            (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
        such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
        section.
            (2) Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the 
        authorization contained in this subsection shall remain 
        available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.

PART 9--DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED CLINICAL INFORMATION 
                                SYSTEMS

SEC. 5181. GRANTS FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants for demonstration 
projects to promote the development and use of electronically 
integrated community-based clinical information systems and 
computerized patient medical records.
    (b) Applications.--
            (1) Submission.--To apply for a grant under this part for 
        any fiscal year, an applicant shall submit an application to 
        the Secretary in accordance with the procedures established by 
        the Secretary.
            (2) Criteria for approval.--The Secretary may not approve 
        an application submitted under paragraph (1) unless the 
        application includes assurances satisfactory to the Secretary 
        regarding the following:
                    (A) Use of existing technology.--Funds received 
                under this part will be used to apply 
                telecommunications and information systems technology 
                that is in existence on the date the application is 
                submitted in a manner that improves the quality of 
                health care, reduces the costs of such care, and 
                protects the privacy and confidentiality of information 
                relating to the physical or mental condition of an 
                individual.
                    (B) Use of existing information systems.--Funds 
                received under this part will be used--
                            (i) to enhance telecommunications or 
                        information systems that are operating on the 
                        date the application is submitted;
                            (ii) to integrate telecommunications or 
                        information systems that are operating on the 
                        date the application is submitted; or
                            (iii) to connect additional users to 
                        telecommunications or information networks or 
                        systems that are operating on the date the 
                        application is submitted.
                    (C) Matching funds.--The applicant shall make 
                available funds for the demonstration project in an 
                amount that equals at least 20 percent of the cost of 
                the project.
    (c) Geographic Diversity.--In making any grants under this part, 
the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, make grants to persons 
representing different geographic areas of the United States, including 
urban and rural areas.
    (d) Review and Sanctions.--The Secretary shall review at least 
annually the compliance of a person receiving a grant under this part 
with the provisions of this part. The Secretary shall establish a 
procedure for determining whether such a person has failed to comply 
substantially within the provisions of this part and the sanctions to 
be imposed for any such noncompliance.
    (e) Annual Report.--The Secretary shall submit an annual report to 
the President for transmittal to Congress containing a description of 
the activities carried out under this part.
    (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of 
this section.

           PART 10--MEDICARE AND MEDICAID COVERAGE DATA BANK

SEC. 5191. REPEAL OF MEDICARE AND MEDICAID COVERAGE DATA BANK.

    (a) Repeal of Data Bank.--Section 1144 of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320b-14), as added by section 13581 of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1993, is repealed.
    (b) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Medicare.--Section 1862(b)(5) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1395y(b)(5)) is amended--
                    (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``the 
                information received under'' and all that follows and 
                inserting ``the information received under subparagraph 
                (A) for the purposes of carrying out this 
                subsection.''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (C)(i), by striking 
                ``subparagraph (B)(i)'' and inserting ``subparagraph 
                (B)''.
            (2) Medicaid.--Section 1902(a)(25)(A)(i) of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396(a)(25)(A)(i)) is amended by striking ``(including 
        the use of information collected by the Medicare and Medicaid 
        Coverage Data Bank under section 1144 and any additional 
        measures as specified'' and inserting ``(as specified''.
            (3) Conforming amendment related to data matches.--
        Subsection (a)(8)(B) of section 552a of title 5, United States 
        Code, is amended--
                    (A) in clause (v), by adding ``; or'' at the end;
                    (B) in clause (vi), by striking ``; or'' and 
                inserting a semicolon; and
                    (C) by striking clause (vii).
            (4) Conforming amendment to erisa.--
                    (A) Section 101 of the Employee Retirement Income 
                Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1031) is amended--
                            (i) by striking subsection (f); and
                            (ii) by redesignating subsection (g) as 
                        subsection (f).
                    (B) Section 502(a) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(a)) 
                is amended--
                            (i) in paragraph (6), by striking the 
                        semicolon at the end and inserting ``; or'';
                            (ii) in paragraph (7), by striking ``; or'' 
                        and inserting a period; and
                            (iii) by striking paragraph (8).
                    (C) Section 502(c) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(c)) 
                is amended by striking paragraph (4).
                    (D) Section 502(e)(1) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
                1132(e)(1)) is amended by striking ``fiduciary, or any 
                person referred to in section 101(f)(1)'' and inserting 
                ``or fiduciary''.

               Subtitle C--Privacy of Health Information

                    PART 1--FINDINGS AND DEFINITIONS

SEC. 5201. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

    (a) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows:
            (1) The improper disclosure of individually identifiable 
        health care information may cause significant harm to an 
        individual's interests in privacy, health care, and reputation 
        and may unfairly affect the ability of an individual to obtain 
        employment, education, insurance, and credit.
            (2) The movement of people and health care related 
        information across State lines, the availability of, access to, 
        and exchange of health care related information with Federally 
        funded health care systems, the medicare program under title 
        XVIII of the Social Security Act, and the medicaid program 
        under title XIX of such Act, through automated data banks and 
        networks, and the emergence of other multistate health care 
        providers and payors create a need for a uniform Federal law 
        governing the disclosure of health care information.
    (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this subtitle is to establish 
effective mechanisms to protect the privacy of individuals with respect 
to individually identifiable health care information that is created or 
maintained as part of health treatment, enrollment, payment, testing, 
or research processes.

SEC. 5202. DEFINITIONS.

    (a) Terms Relating to Protected Health Information.--In this 
subtitle:
            (1) Protected health information.--The term ``protected 
        health information'' means any information, including 
        demographic information collected from an individual, whether 
        oral or recorded in any form or medium, that--
                    (A) is created or received by a health care 
                provider, health plan, health oversight agency, health 
                researcher, public health authority, employer, life 
                insurer, school or university, or certified health 
                information network service; and
                    (B) relates to the past, present, or future 
                physical or mental health or condition of an 
                individual, the provision of health care to an 
                individual, or the past, present, or future payment for 
                the provision of health care to an individual, and--
                            (i) identifies an individual; or
                            (ii) with respect to which there is a 
                        reasonable basis to believe that the 
                        information can be used to identify an 
                        individual.
            (2) Disclose.--The term ``disclose'', when used with 
        respect to protected health information, means to provide 
        access to the information, but only if such access is provided 
        to a person other than the individual who is the subject of the 
        information.
    (b) Terms Relating to Health Care System Participants.--In this 
subtitle:
            (1) Health information trustee.--The term ``health 
        information trustee'' means--
                    (A) a health care provider, health plan, health 
                oversight agency, certified health information network 
                service, employer, life insurer, or school or 
                university insofar as it creates, receives, maintains, 
                uses, or transmits protected health information;
                    (B) any person who obtains protected health 
                information under section 5213, 5217, 5218, 5221, 5222, 
                5226, or 5231; and
                    (C) any employee or agent of a person covered under 
                subparagraph (A) or (B).
            (2) Health care.--The term ``health care''--
                    (A) means--
                            (i) a preventative, diagnostic, 
                        therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance, or 
                        palliative care, counseling, service, or 
                        procedure--
                                    (I) with respect to the physical or 
                                mental condition of an individual; or
                                    (II) affecting the structure or 
                                function of the human body or any part 
                                of the human body; or
                            (ii) any sale or dispensing of a drug, 
                        device, equipment, or other item to an 
                        individual, or for the use of an individual, 
                        pursuant to a prescription; but
                    (B) does not include any item or service that is 
                not furnished for the purpose of examining, 
                maintaining, or improving the health of an individual.
            (3) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
        provider'' means a person who is licensed, certified, 
        registered, or otherwise authorized by law to provide an item 
        or service that constitutes health care in the ordinary course 
        of business or practice of a profession.
            (4) Health oversight agency.--The term ``health oversight 
        agency'' means a person who--
                    (A) performs or oversees the performance of an 
                assessment, evaluation, determination, or investigation 
                relating to the licensing, accreditation, or 
                certification of health care 
                providers; or
                    (B)(i) performs or oversees the performance of an 
                assessment, evaluation, determination, or investigation 
                relating to the effectiveness of, compliance with, or 
                applicability of legal, fiscal, medical, or scientific 
                standards or aspects of performance related to the 
                delivery of, or payment for, health care or relating to 
                health care fraud or fraudulent claims for payment 
                regarding health; and
                    (ii) is a public agency, acting on behalf of a 
                public agency, acting pursuant to a requirement of a 
                public agency, or carrying out activities under a 
                Federal or State law governing the assessment, 
                evaluation, determination, or investigation described 
                in clause (i).
            (5) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' shall have the 
        meaning given such term under section 5102.
            (6) Health researcher.--The term ``health researcher'' 
        means a person who conducts a biomedical, public health, 
        epidemiological, health services, or health statistics research 
        project or a research project on social and behavioral factors 
        relating to health.
            (7) Institutional review board.--The term ``institutional 
        review board'' means--
                    (A) a board established in accordance with 
                regulations of the Secretary under section 491(a) of 
                the Public Health Service Act;
                    (B) a similar board established by the Secretary 
                for the protection of human subjects in research 
                conducted by the Secretary; or
                    (C) a similar board established under regulations 
                of a Federal Government authority other than the 
                Secretary.
            (8) Public health authority.--The term ``public health 
        authority'' means an authority or instrumentality of the United 
        States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State that is 
        (A) responsible for public health matters; and (B) engaged in 
        such activities as injury reporting, public health 
        surveillance, and public health investigation or intervention.
    (c) References to Certified Entities.--In this subtitle:
            (1) Certified health information network service.--The term 
        ``certified health information network service'' means a health 
        information service (as defined under section 5102) that is 
        certified under section 5141.
            (2) Certified health information protection organization.--
        The term ``certified health information protection 
        organization'' means a health information protection 
        organization (as defined in section 5102) that is certified 
        under section 5141.
    (d) Other Terms.--In this subtitle:
            (1) Individual representative.--The term ``individual 
        representative'' means any individual legally empowered to make 
        decisions concerning the provision of health care to an 
        individual (where the individual lacks the legal capacity under 
        State law to make such decisions) or the administrator or 
        executor of the estate of a deceased individual.
            (2) Law enforcement inquiry.--The term ``law enforcement 
        inquiry'' means an investigation or official proceeding 
        inquiring into whether there is a violation of, or failure to 
        comply with, any criminal or civil statute or any regulation, 
        rule, or order issued pursuant to such a statute.
            (3) Person.--The term ``person'' includes an authority of 
        the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a 
        State.

                     PART 2--AUTHORIZED DISCLOSURES

                     Subpart A--General Provisions

SEC. 5206. GENERAL RULES REGARDING DISCLOSURE.

    (a) General Rule.--A health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information only for a purpose that is authorized 
under this subtitle.
    (b) Disclosure Within a Trustee.--A health information trustee may 
disclose protected health information to an officer, employee, or agent 
of the trustee, but only for a purpose that is compatible with and 
related to the purpose for which the information was collected or 
received by that trustee.
    (c) Scope of Disclosure.--
            (1) In general.--Every disclosure of protected health 
        information by a health information trustee shall be limited to 
        the minimum amount of information necessary to accomplish the 
        purpose for which the information is disclosed.
            (2) Regulations.--The Secretary, after notice and 
        opportunity for public comment, may issue regulations under 
        paragraph (1), which shall take into account the technical 
        capabilities of the record systems used to maintain protected 
        health information and the costs of limiting disclosure.
    (d) No General Requirement To Disclose.--Nothing in this subtitle 
that permits a disclosure of health information shall be construed to 
require such disclosure.
    (e) Use and Redisclosure of Information.--The protected health 
information received under a disclosure permitted by the subtitle may 
not be used or disclosed unless the use or disclosure is necessary to 
fulfill the purpose for which the information was obtained and is not 
otherwise prohibited by law. Protected health information about an 
individual that is disclosed under this subtitle may not be used in, or 
disclosed to any person for use in, any administrative, civil, or 
criminal action or investigation directed against the individual unless 
specifically permitted by this subtitle.
    (f) Identification of Disclosed Information as Protected 
Information.--
            (1) In general.--Except with respect to protected health 
        information that is disclosed under section 5213 and except as 
        provided in paragraph (2), a health information trustee may not 
        disclose protected health information unless such information 
        is clearly identified as protected health information that is 
        subject to this subtitle.
            (2) Routine disclosures subject to written agreement.--A 
        health information trustee who routinely discloses protected 
        health information to a person may satisfy the identification 
        requirement in paragraph (1) through a written agreement 
        between the trustee and the person with respect to the 
        protected health information.
    (g) Construction.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to 
limit the ability of a health information trustee to charge a 
reasonable fee for the disclosure or reproduction of health 
information.
    (h) Information in Which Providers are Identified.--The Secretary, 
after notice and opportunity for public comment, may issue regulations 
protecting information identifying providers in order to promote the 
availability of health care services.

SEC. 5207. AUTHORIZATIONS FOR DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH 
              INFORMATION.

    (a) Written Authorizations.--A health information trustee may 
disclose protected health information pursuant to an authorization 
executed by the individual who is the subject of the information, if 
each of the following requirements is met:
            (1) Writing.--The authorization is in writing, signed by 
        the individual who is the subject of the information, and dated 
        on the date of such signature.
            (2) Separate form.--The authorization is not on a form used 
        to authorize or facilitate the provision of, or payment for, 
        health care.
            (3) Trustee described.--The trustee is specifically named 
        or generically described in the authorization as authorized to 
        disclose such information.
            (4) Recipient described.--The person to whom the 
        information is to be disclosed is specifically named or 
        generically described in the authorization as a person to whom 
        such information may be disclosed.
            (5) Statement of intended disclosures.--The authorization 
        contains an acknowledgment that the individual who is the 
        subject of the information has read a statement of the 
        disclosures that the person to receive the protected health 
        information intends to make, which statement shall be in 
        writing, on a form that is distinct from the authorization for 
        disclosure, and which statement must be received by the 
        individual authorizing the disclosure on or before such 
        authorization is executed.
            (6) Information described.--The information to be disclosed 
        is described in the authorization.
            (7) Expiration date specified.--The authorization specifies 
        a date or event upon which the authorization expires, which 
        shall not exceed 2 years from the date of the execution of the 
        authorization.
            (8) Authorization timely received.--The authorization is 
        received by the trustee during a period described in subsection 
        (c)(1).
            (9) Disclosure timely made.--The disclosure occurs during a 
        period described in subsection (c)(2).
    (b) Authorizations Requested in Connection With Provision of Health 
Care.--
            (1) In general.--A health information trustee may not 
        request that an individual provide to any other person an 
        authorization described in subsection (a) on a day on which--
                    (A) the trustee provides health care to the 
                individual requested to provide the authorization; or
                    (B) in the case of a trustee that is a health 
                facility, the individual is admitted into the facility 
                as a resident or inpatient in order to receive health 
                care.
            (2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) does not apply if a health 
        information trustee requests that an individual provide an 
        authorization described in subsection (a) for the purpose of 
        assisting the individual in obtaining counseling or social 
        services from a person other than the trustee.
    (c) Time Limitations on Authorizations.--
            (1) Receipt by trustee.--For purposes of subsection (a)(8), 
        an authorization is timely received if it is received by the 
        trustee during--
                    (A) the 1-year period beginning on the date on 
                which the authorization is signed under subsection 
                (a)(1), if the authorization permits the disclosure of 
                protected health information to a person who provides 
                health counseling or social services to individuals; or
                    (B) the 30-day period beginning on the date on 
                which the authorization is signed under subsection 
                (a)(1), if the authorization permits the disclosure of 
                protected health information to a person other than a 
                person described in subparagraph (A).
            (2) Disclosure by trustee.--For purposes of subsection 
        (a)(9), a disclosure is timely made if it occurs before the 
        date or event specified in the authorization upon which the 
        authorization expires.
    (d) Revocation or Amendment of Authorization.--
            (1) In general.--An individual may in writing revoke or 
        amend an authorization described in subsection (a), in whole or 
        in part, at any time, except when--
                    (A) disclosure of protected health information has 
                been authorized to permit validation of expenditures 
                for health care; or
                    (B) action has been taken in reliance on the 
                authorization.
            (2) Notice of revocation.--A health information trustee who 
        discloses protected health information pursuant to an 
        authorization that has been revoked shall not be subject to any 
        liability or penalty under this subtitle if--
                    (A) the reliance was in good faith;
                    (B) the trustee had no notice of the revocation; 
                and
                    (C) the disclosure was otherwise in accordance with 
                the requirements of this subtitle.
    (e) Deceased Individual.--The Secretary shall develop and establish 
through regulation a procedure for obtaining protected health 
information relating to a deceased individual when there is no 
individual representative for such individual.
    (f) Model Authorizations.--The Secretary, after notice and 
opportunity for public comment, shall develop and disseminate model 
written authorizations of the type described in subsection (a) and 
model statements of intended disclosures of the type described in 
subsection (a)(5).
    (g) Copy.--A health information trustee who discloses protected 
health information pursuant to an authorization under this section 
shall maintain a copy of the authorization.

SEC. 5208. CERTIFIED HEALTH INFORMATION NETWORK SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--A health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information to a certified health information network 
service acting as an agent of the trustee for any purpose permitted by 
this subtitle. Such a service, acting as an agent of a trustee, may 
disclose protected health information to another person as permitted 
under this subtitle to facilitate the completion of the purpose for 
which such information was disclosed to the service.
    (b) Certified Health Information Protection Organizations.--A 
health information trustee may disclose protected health information to 
a certified health information protection organization for the purpose 
of creating non-identifiable health information (as defined in section 
5102).

          Subpart B--Specific Disclosures Relating to Patient

SEC. 5211. DISCLOSURES FOR TREATMENT AND FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
              TRANSACTIONS.

    (a) Health Care Treatment.--A health care provider, health plan, 
employer, or person who receives protected health information under 
section 5213, may disclose protected health information to a health 
care provider for the purpose of providing health care to an individual 
if the individual who is the subject of the information has not 
previously objected in writing to the disclosure.
    (b) Disclosure to Health Plans for Financial and Administrative 
Purposes.--A health care provider or employer may disclose protected 
health information to a health plan for the purpose of providing for 
the payment for, or reviewing the payment of, health care furnished to 
an individual.
    (c) Disclosure by Health Plans for Financial and Administrative 
Purposes.--A health plan may disclose protected health information to a 
health care provider or a health plan for the purpose of providing for 
the payment for, or reviewing the payment of, health care furnished to 
an individual.

SEC. 5212. NEXT OF KIN AND DIRECTORY INFORMATION.

    (a) Next of Kin.--A health care provider or person who receives 
protected health information under section 5213 may disclose protected 
health information to the next of kin, an individual representative of 
the individual who is the subject of the information, or an individual 
with whom that individual has a close personal relationship if--
            (1) the individual who is the subject of the information--
                    (A) has been notified of the individual's right to 
                object and has not objected to the disclosure;
                    (B) is not competent to be notified about the right 
                to object; or
                    (C) exigent circumstances exist such that it would 
                not be practicable to notify the individual of the 
                right to object; and
            (2) the information disclosed relates to health care 
        currently being provided to that individual.
    (b) Directory Information.--A health care provider and a person 
receiving protected health information under section 5213 may disclose 
protected health information to any person if--
            (1) the information does not reveal specific information 
        about the physical or mental condition of the individual who is 
        the subject of the information or health care provided to that 
        person;
            (2) the individual who is the subject of the information--
                    (A) has been notified of the individual's right to 
                object and has not objected to the disclosure;
                    (B) is not competent to be notified about the right 
                to object; or
                    (C) exigent circumstances exist such that it would 
                not be practicable to notify the individual of the 
                right to object; and
            (3) the information consists only of 1 or more of the 
        following items:
                    (A) The name of the individual who is the subject 
                of the information.
                    (B) If the individual who is the subject of the 
                information is receiving health care from a health care 
                provider on a premises controlled by the provider--
                            (i) the location of the individual on the 
                        premises; and
                            (ii) the general health status of the 
                        individual, described as critical, poor, fair, 
                        stable, or satisfactory or in terms denoting 
                        similar conditions.
    (d) Identification of Deceased Individual.--A health care provider, 
health plan, employer, or life insurer, may disclose protected health 
information if necessary to assist in the identification of a deceased 
individual.

SEC. 5213. EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES.

    (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, employer, or 
person who receives protected health information under this section may 
disclose protected health information in emergency circumstances when 
necessary to protect the health or safety of an individual from 
imminent harm.
    (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to persons who need the 
information to take action to protect the health or safety of the 
individual.

   Subpart C--Disclosure for Oversight, Public Health, and Research 
                                Purposes

SEC. 5216. OVERSIGHT.

    (a) In General.--A health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information to a health oversight agency for an 
oversight function authorized by law.
    (b) Use in Action Against Individuals.--Notwithstanding section 
5206(e), protected health information about an individual that is 
disclosed under this section may be used in, or disclosed to any person 
for use in, any administrative, civil, or criminal action or 
investigation directed against the individual who is the subject of the 
information if the action or investigation arises out of and is 
directly related to receipt of health care or payment for health care 
or an action involving a fraudulent claim related to health.

SEC. 5217. PUBLIC HEALTH.

    A health care provider, health plan, public health authority, 
employer, or person who receives protected health information under 
section 5213 may disclose protected health information to a public 
health authority or other person authorized by law for use in a legally 
authorized--
            (1) disease or injury reporting;
            (2) public health surveillance; or
            (3) public health investigation or intervention.

SEC. 5218. HEALTH RESEARCH.

    (a) In General.--A health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information to a health researcher if an institutional 
review board determines that the research project engaged in by the 
health researcher--
            (1) requires use of the protected health information for 
        the effectiveness of the project; and
            (2) is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion 
        into the privacy of the individual who is the subject of the 
        information that would result from the disclosure.
    (b) Research Requiring Direct Contact.--A health information 
trustee may disclose protected health information to a health 
researcher for a research project that includes direct contact with an 
individual who is the subject of protected health information if an 
institutional review board determines that--
            (1) the research project meets the requirements of 
        paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a);
            (2) direct contact is necessary to accomplish the research 
        purpose; and
            (3) the direct contact will be made in a manner that 
        minimizes the risk of harm, embarrassment, or other adverse 
        consequences to the individual.
    (c) Use of Health Information Network.--
            (1) In general.--A health information trustee may disclose 
        protected health information to a health researcher using the 
        health information network (as defined in section 5102) only if 
        an institutional review board certified by the Secretary under 
        paragraph (2) determines that the research project engaged in 
        by the health researcher meets the requirements of this 
        section.
            (2) Certification of institutional review boards.--
                    (A) Regulations.--The Secretary, after notice and 
                opportunity for public comment, shall issue regulations 
                establishing certification requirements for 
                institutional review boards under this subtitle. Such 
                regulations shall be based on regulations issued under 
                section 491(a) of the Public Health Service Act and 
                shall ensure that institutional review boards certified 
                under this paragraph have the qualifications to access 
                and protect the confidentiality of research subjects.
                    (B) Certification.--The Secretary shall certify an 
                institutional review board that meets the certification 
                requirements established by the Secretary under 
                subparagraph (A).
    (d) Obligations of Recipient.--A person who receives protected 
health information pursuant to subsection (a)--
            (1) shall remove or destroy, at the earliest opportunity 
        consistent with the purposes of the project, information that 
        would enable an individual to be identified, unless--
                    (A) an institutional review board has determined 
                that there is a health or research justification for 
                retention of such identifiers; and
                    (B) there is an adequate plan to protect the 
                identifiers from disclosure that is inconsistent with 
                this section; and
            (2) shall use protected health information solely for 
        purposes of the health research project for which disclosure 
        was authorized under this section.

Subpart D--Disclosure For Judicial, Administrative, and Law Enforcement 
                                Purposes

SEC. 5221. JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PURPOSES.

    A health care provider, health plan, health oversight agency, or 
employer may disclose protected health information--
            (1) pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the 
        Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, or comparable rules of 
        other courts or administrative agencies in connection with 
        litigation or proceedings to which the individual who is the 
        subject of the information is a party and in which the 
        individual has placed the individual's physical or mental 
        condition in issue;
            (2) to a court, and to others ordered by a court, if the 
        protected health information is developed in response to a 
        court-ordered physical or mental examination; or
            (3) pursuant to a law requiring the reporting of specific 
        medical information to law enforcement authorities.

SEC. 5222. LAW ENFORCEMENT.

    (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, employer, or person who receives protected health 
information under section 5213 may disclose protected health 
information to a law enforcement agency (other than a health oversight 
agency governed by section 5216) if the information is requested for 
use--
            (1) in an investigation or prosecution of a health 
        information trustee;
            (2) in the identification of a victim or witness in a law 
        enforcement inquiry; or
            (3) in connection with the investigation of criminal 
        activity committed against the trustee or on premises 
        controlled by the trustee.
    (b) Certification.--When a law enforcement agency (other than a 
health oversight agency) requests that a health information trustee 
disclose protected health information under this section, the law 
enforcement agency shall provide the trustee with a written 
certification that--
            (1) specifies the information requested;
            (2) states that the information is needed for a lawful 
        purpose under this section; and
            (3) is signed by a supervisory official of a rank 
        designated by the head of the agency.
    (c) Restrictions on Additional Disclosure.--Notwithstanding section 
5206(e), protected health information about an individual that is 
disclosed to a law enforcement agency under this section may be used 
in, or disclosed for, an administrative, civil, or criminal action or 
investigation against the individual if the action or investigation 
arises out of and is directly related to the action or investigation 
for which the information was obtained.

    Subpart E--Disclosure Pursuant to Government Subpoena or Warrant

SEC. 5226. GOVERNMENT SUBPOENAS AND WARRANTS.

    (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, employer, or person who receives protected health 
information under section 5213 may disclose protected health 
information under this section if the disclosure is pursuant to--
            (1) a subpoena issued under the authority of a grand jury, 
        and the trustee is provided a written certification by the 
        grand jury seeking the information that the grand jury has 
        complied with the applicable access provisions of section 5227;
            (2) an administrative subpoena or a judicial subpoena or 
        warrant, and the trustee is provided a written certification by 
        the person seeking the information that the person has complied 
        with the applicable access provisions of section 5227; or
            (3) an administrative subpoena or a judicial subpoena or 
        warrant, and the disclosure otherwise meets the conditions of 
        section 5216, 5217, 5221, or 5222.
    (b) Restrictions on Additional Disclosure.--
            (1) Actions or investigations.--Notwithstanding section 
        5206(c), protected health information about an individual that 
        is received under subsection (a) may be disclosed for, or used 
        in, any administrative, civil, or criminal action or 
        investigation against the individual if the action or 
        investigation arises out of and is directly related to the 
        inquiry for which the information was obtained.
            (2) Special rule.--Protected health information about an 
        individual that is received under subsection (a)(3) may not be 
        disclosed by the recipient unless the recipient complies with 
        the conditions and restrictions on disclosure with which the 
        recipient would have been required to comply if the disclosure 
        had been made under section 5216, 5217, 5221, or 5222.

SEC. 5227. ACCESS PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SUBPOENAS AND 
              WARRANTS.

    (a) Probable Cause Requirement.--A government authority may not 
obtain protected health information about an individual under paragraph 
(1) or (2) of section 5226(a) for use in a law enforcement inquiry 
unless there is probable cause to believe that the information is 
relevant to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry being conducted by the 
government authority.
    (b) Warrants.--A government authority that obtains protected health 
information about an individual under circumstances described in 
subsection (a) and pursuant to a warrant shall, not later than 30 days 
after the date the warrant was executed, serve the individual with, or 
mail to the last known address of the individual, a notice that 
protected health information about the individual was so obtained, 
together with a notice of the individual's right to challenge the 
warrant in accordance with section 5228.
    (c) Subpoenas.--Except as provided in subsection (d), a government 
authority may not obtain protected health information about an 
individual under circumstances described in subsection (a) and pursuant 
to a subpoena unless a copy of the subpoena has been served on the 
individual on or before the date of return of the subpoena, together 
with a notice of the individual's right to challenge the subpoena in 
accordance with section 5228, and--
            (1) 15 days have passed since the date of service on the 
        individual and within that time period the individual has not 
        initiated a challenge in accordance with section 5228; or
            (2) disclosure is ordered by a court after challenge under 
        section 5228.
    (d) Application for Delay.--
            (1) In general.--A government authority may apply ex parte 
        and under seal to an appropriate court to delay (for an initial 
        period of not longer than 90 days) serving a notice or copy of 
        a subpoena required under subsection (b) or (c) with respect to 
        a law enforcement inquiry. The government authority may apply 
        to the court for extensions of the delay.
            (2) Reasons for delay.--An application for a delay, or 
        extension of a delay, under this subsection shall state, with 
        reasonable specificity, the reasons why the delay or extension 
        is being sought.
            (3) Ex parte order.--The court shall enter an ex parte 
        order delaying or extending the delay of notice, an order 
        prohibiting the disclosure of the request for, or disclosure 
        of, the protected health information, and an order requiring 
        the disclosure of the protected health information if the court 
        finds that--
                    (A) the inquiry being conducted is within the 
                lawful jurisdiction of the government authority seeking 
                the protected health information;
                    (B) there is probable cause to believe that the 
                protected health information being sought is relevant 
                to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry;
                    (C) the government authority's need for the 
                information outweighs the privacy interest of the 
                individual who is the subject of the information; and
                    (D) there is reasonable ground to believe that 
                receipt of notice by the individual will result in--
                            (i) endangering the life or physical safety 
                        of any individual;
                            (ii) flight from prosecution;
                            (iii) destruction of or tampering with 
                        evidence or the information being sought; or
                            (iv) intimidation of potential witnesses.

SEC. 5228. CHALLENGE PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT WARRANTS AND 
              SUBPOENAS.

    (a) Motion To Quash.--Within 15 days after the date of service of a 
notice of execution or a copy of a subpoena of a government authority 
seeking protected health information about an individual under 
paragraph (1) or (2) of section 5226(a), the individual may file a 
motion to quash--
            (1) in the case of a State judicial warrant or subpoena, in 
        the court which issued the warrant or subpoena;
            (2) in the case of a warrant or subpoena issued under the 
        authority of a State that is not a State judicial warrant or 
        subpoena, in a court of competent jurisdiction; or
            (3) in the case of any other warrant or subpoena issued 
        under the authority of a Federal court or the United States, in 
        the United States district court for the district in which the 
        individual resides or in which the warrant or subpoena was 
        issued.
    (b) Copy.--A copy of the motion shall be served by the individual 
upon the government authority by registered or certified mail.
    (c) Proceedings.--The government authority may file with the court 
such papers, including affidavits and other sworn documents, as sustain 
the validity of the warrant or subpoena. The individual may file with 
the court reply papers in response to the government authority's 
filing. The court, upon the request of the individual or the government 
authority or both, may proceed in camera. The court may conduct such 
proceedings as it deems appropriate to rule on the motion, but shall 
endeavor to expedite its determination.
    (d) Standard for Decision.--A court may deny a motion under 
subsection (a) if it finds there is probable cause to believe the 
protected health information is relevant to a legitimate law 
enforcement inquiry being conducted by the government authority, unless 
the court finds the individual's privacy interest outweighs the 
government authority's need for the information. The individual shall 
have the burden of demonstrating that the individual's privacy interest 
outweighs the need by the government authority for the information.
    (e) Specific Considerations With Respect to Privacy Interest.--In 
reaching its determination, the court shall consider--
            (1) the particular purpose for which the information was 
        collected;
            (2) the degree to which disclosure of the information will 
        embarrass, injure, or invade the privacy of the individual;
            (3) the effect of the disclosure on the individual's future 
        health care;
            (4) the importance of the inquiry being conducted by the 
        government authority, and the importance of the information to 
        that inquiry; and
            (5) any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
    (f) Attorney's Fees.--In the case of a motion brought under 
subsection (a) in which the individual has substantially prevailed, the 
court may assess against the government authority a reasonable 
attorney's fee and other litigation costs (including expert's fees) 
reasonably incurred.
    (g) No Interlocutory Appeal.--A ruling denying a motion to quash 
under this section shall not be deemed to be a final order, and no 
interlocutory appeal may be taken therefrom by the individual. An 
appeal of such a ruling may be taken by the individual within such 
period of time as is provided by law as part of any appeal from a final 
order in any legal proceeding initiated against the individual arising 
out of or based upon the protected health information disclosed.

        Subpart F--Disclosure Pursuant to Private Party Subpoena

SEC. 5231. PRIVATE PARTY SUBPOENAS.

    A health care provider, health plan, employer, or person who 
receives protected health information under section 5213 may disclose 
protected health information under this section if the disclosure is 
pursuant to a subpoena issued on behalf of a private party who has 
complied with the access provisions of section 5232.

SEC. 5232. ACCESS PROCEDURES FOR PRIVATE PARTY SUBPOENAS.

    A private party may not obtain protected health information about 
an individual pursuant to a subpoena unless a copy of the subpoena 
together with a notice of the individual's right to challenge the 
subpoena in accordance with section 5233 has been served upon the 
individual on or before the date of return of the subpoena, and--
            (1) 15 days have passed since the date of service on the 
        individual, and within that time period the individual has not 
        initiated a challenge in accordance with section 5233; or
            (2) disclosure is ordered by a court under section 5233.

SEC. 5233. CHALLENGE PROCEDURES FOR PRIVATE PARTY SUBPOENAS.

    (a) Motion To Quash Subpoena.--Within 15 days after service of a 
copy of the subpoena seeking protected health information under section 
5231, the individual who is the subject of the protected health 
information may file in any court of competent jurisdiction a motion to 
quash the subpoena and serve a copy of the motion on the person seeking 
the information.
    (b) Standard for Decision.--The court shall grant a motion under 
subsection (a) unless the respondent demonstrates that--
            (1) there is reasonable ground to believe the information 
        is relevant to a lawsuit or other judicial or administrative 
        proceeding; and
            (2) the need of the respondent for the information 
        outweighs the privacy interest of the individual.
    (c) Specific Considerations With Respect to Privacy Interest.--In 
determining under subsection (b) whether the need of the respondent for 
the information outweighs the privacy interest of the individual, the 
court shall consider--
            (1) the particular purpose for which the information was 
        collected;
            (2) the degree to which disclosure of the information would 
        embarrass, injure, or invade the privacy of the individual;
            (3) the effect of the disclosure on the individual's future 
        health care;
            (4) the importance of the information to the lawsuit or 
        proceeding; and
            (5) any other relevant factor.
    (d) Attorney's Fees.--In the case of a motion brought under 
subsection (a) in which the individual has substantially prevailed, the 
court may assess against the respondent a reasonable attorney's fee and 
other litigation costs and expenses (including expert's fees) 
reasonably incurred.

     PART 3--PROCEDURES FOR ENSURING SECURITY OF PROTECTED HEALTH 
                              INFORMATION

                 Subpart A--Establishment of Safeguards

SEC. 5236. ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFEGUARDS.

    (a) In General.--A health information trustee shall establish and 
maintain appropriate administrative, technical, and physical 
safeguards--
            (1) to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of 
        protected health information created or received by the 
        trustee; and
            (2) to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards 
        to the security or integrity of such information.
    (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
regarding security measures for protected health information.

SEC. 5237. ACCOUNTING FOR DISCLOSURES.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Requirement to create or maintain record.--A health 
        information trustee shall create and maintain, with respect to 
        any protected health information disclosed in exceptional 
        circumstances (as described in paragraph (2)), a record of--
                    (A) the date and purpose of the disclosure;
                    (B) the name of the person to whom or to which the 
                disclosure was made;
                    (C) the address of the person to whom or to which 
                the disclosure was made or the location to which the 
                disclosure was made; and
                    (D) the information disclosed, if the recording of 
                the information disclosed is practicable, taking into 
                account the technical capabilities of the system used 
                to maintain the record and the costs of such 
                maintenance.
            (2) Exceptional circumstances described.--For purposes of 
        paragraph (1) protected health information is disclosed in 
        exceptional circumstances if the disclosure--
                    (A) is not a routine part of doing business, as 
                determined in accordance with guidelines promulgated by 
                the Secretary; or
                    (B) is permitted under sections 5213 and 5217.
    (b) Disclosure Record Part of Information.--A record created and 
maintained under paragraph (a) shall be maintained as part of the 
protected health information to which the record pertains.

 Subpart B--Review of Protected Health Information By Subjects of the 
                              Information

SEC. 5241. INSPECTION OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), a health 
care provider or health plan--
            (1) shall permit an individual who is the subject of 
        protected health information to inspect any such information 
        that the provider or plan maintains;
            (2) shall permit the individual to have a copy of the 
        information;
            (3) shall permit a person who has been designated in 
        writing by the individual who is the subject of the information 
        to inspect, or to have a copy of, the information on behalf of 
        the individual or to accompany the individual during the 
        inspection; and
            (4) may offer to explain or interpret information that is 
        inspected or copied under this subsection.
    (b) Additional Requests.--Except as provided in subsection (c), a 
health plan or health care provider shall, upon written request of an 
individual--
            (1) determine the identity of previous providers to the 
        individual; and
            (2) obtain protected health information regarding the 
        individual.
    (c) Exceptions.--A health care provider or health plan is not 
required by this section to permit inspection or copying of protected 
health information if any of the following conditions apply:
            (1) Mental health treatment notes.--The information 
        consists of psychiatric, psychological, or mental health 
        treatment notes, and the provider or plan determines, based on 
        reasonable medical judgment, that inspection or copying of the 
        notes would cause sufficient harm to the individual who is the 
        subject of the notes so as to outweigh the desirability of 
        permitting access, and the provider or plan has not disclosed 
        the notes to any person not directly engaged in treating the 
        individual, except with the authorization of the individual or 
        under compulsion of law.
            (2) Information about others.--The information relates to 
        an individual other than the individual seeking to inspect or 
        have a copy of the information and the provider or plan 
        determines, based on reasonable medical judgment, that 
        inspection or copying of the information would cause sufficient 
        harm to 1 or both of the individuals so as to outweigh the 
        desirability of permitting access.
            (3) Endangerment to life or safety.--The provider or plan 
        determines that disclosure of the information could reasonably 
        be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any 
        individual.
            (4) Confidential source.--The information identifies or 
        could reasonably lead to the identification of a person (other 
        than a health care provider) who provided information under a 
        promise of confidentiality to a health care provider concerning 
        the individual who is the subject of the information.
            (5) Administrative purposes.--The information--
                    (A) is used by the provider or plan solely for 
                administrative purposes and not in the provision of 
                health care to the individual who is the subject of the 
                information; and
                    (B) has not been disclosed by the provider or plan 
                to any other person.
    (d) Inspection and Copying of Segregable Portion.--A health care 
provider or health plan shall permit inspection and copying under 
subsection (a) of any reasonably segregable portion of a record after 
deletion of any portion that is exempt under subsection (c).
    (e) Conditions.--A health care provider or health plan may require 
a written request for the inspection and copying of protected health 
information under this subsection. The health care provider or health 
plan may require a cost reimbursement for such inspection and copying.
    (f) Statement of Reasons for Denial.--If a health care provider or 
health plan denies a request for inspection or copying under this 
section, the provider or plan shall provide the individual who made the 
request (or the individual's designated representative) with a written 
statement of the reasons for the denial.
    (g) Deadline.--A health care provider or health plan shall comply 
with or deny a request for inspection or copying of protected health 
information under this section within the 30-day period beginning on 
the date on which the provider or plan receives the request.

SEC. 5242. AMENDMENT OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--A health care provider or health plan shall, 
within the 45-day period beginning on the date on which the provider or 
plan receives from an individual a written request that the provider or 
plan correct or amend the information--
            (1) make the correction or amendment requested;
            (2) inform the individual of the correction or amendment 
        that has been made; and
            (3) inform any person who is identified by the individual, 
        who is not an officer, employee or agent of the provider or 
        plan, and to whom the uncorrected or unamended portion of the 
        information was previously disclosed, of the correction or 
        amendment that has been made.
    (b) Refusal To Correct.--If the provider or plan refuses to make 
the corrections, the provider or plan shall inform the individual of--
            (1) the reasons for the refusal of the provider or plan to 
        make the correction or amendment;
            (2) any procedures for further review of the refusal; and
            (3) the individual's right to file with the provider or 
        plan a concise statement setting forth the requested correction 
        or amendment and the individual's reasons for disagreeing with 
        the refusal of the provider or plan.
    (c) Bases for Request To Correct or Amend.--An individual may 
request correction or amendment of protected health information about 
the individual under paragraph (a) if the information is not timely, 
accurate, relevant to the system of records, or complete.
    (d) Statement of Disagreement.--After an individual has filed a 
statement of disagreement under paragraph (b)(3), the provider or plan, 
in any subsequent disclosure of the disputed portion of the 
information--
            (1) shall include a copy of the individual's statement; and
            (2) may include a concise statement of the reasons of the 
        provider or plan for not making the requested correction or 
        amendment.
    (e) Rule of Construction.--This section shall not be construed to 
require a health care provider or health plan to conduct a formal, 
informal, or other hearing or proceeding concerning a request for a 
correction or amendment to protected health information the provider or 
plan maintains.
    (f) Correction.--For purposes of paragraph (a), a correction is 
deemed to have been made to protected health information when 
information that is not timely, accurate, relevant to the system of 
records, or complete is clearly marked as incorrect or when 
supplementary correct information is made part of the information.

SEC. 5243. NOTICE OF INFORMATION PRACTICES.

    (a) Preparation of Written Notice.--A health care provider or 
health plan shall prepare a written notice of information practices 
describing the following:
            (1) Personal rights of an individual.--The rights under 
        this subpart of an individual who is the subject of protected 
        health information, including the right to inspect and copy 
        such information and the right to seek amendments to such 
        information, and the procedures for authorizing disclosures of 
        protected health information and for revoking such 
        authorizations.
            (2) Procedures of provider or plan.--The procedures 
        established by the provider or plan for the exercise of the 
        rights of individuals about whom protected health information 
        is maintained.
            (3) Authorized disclosures.--The disclosures of protected 
        health information that are authorized.
    (b) Dissemination of Notice.--A health care provider or health 
plan--
            (1) shall, upon request, provide any individual with a copy 
        of the notice of information practices described in subsection 
        (a); and
            (2) shall make reasonable efforts to inform individuals in 
        a clear and conspicuous manner of the existence and 
        availability of the notice.
    (c) Model Notice.--The Secretary, after notice and opportunity for 
public comment, shall develop and disseminate a model notice of 
information practices for use by health care providers and health plans 
under this section.

            Subpart C--Standards for Electronic Disclosures

SEC. 5246. STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC DISCLOSURES.

    The Secretary shall promulgate standards for disclosing protected 
health information in accordance with this subtitle in electronic form. 
Such standards shall include standards relating to the creation, 
transmission, receipt, and maintenance, of any written document 
required or authorized under this subtitle.

                           PART 4--SANCTIONS

            Subpart A--No Sanctions for Permissible Actions

SEC. 5251. NO LIABILITY FOR PERMISSIBLE DISCLOSURES.

    A health information trustee who makes a disclosure of protected 
health information about an individual that is permitted by this 
subtitle shall not be liable to the individual for the disclosure under 
common law.

SEC. 5252. NO LIABILITY FOR INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD DETERMINATIONS.

    If the members of an institutional review board make a 
determination in good faith that--
            (1) a health research project is of sufficient importance 
        to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of an individual; 
        and
            (2) the effectiveness of the project requires use of 
        protected health information,
the members, the board, and the parent institution of the board shall 
not be liable to the individual as a result of the determination.

SEC. 5253. RELIANCE ON CERTIFIED ENTITY.

    If a health information trustee contracts with a certified health 
information network service to make a disclosure of any protected 
health information on behalf of such trustee in accordance with this 
subtitle and such service makes a disclosure of such information that 
is in violation of this subtitle, the trustee shall not be liable to 
the individual who is the subject of the information for such unlawful 
disclosure.

                       Subpart B--Civil Sanctions

SEC. 5256. CIVIL PENALTY.

    (a) Violation.--Any health information trustee who the Secretary 
determines has substantially failed to comply with this subtitle shall 
be subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed 
by law, to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each such 
violation.
    (b) Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--Section 1128A of the 
Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the second 
sentence of subsection (f) of that section, shall apply to the 
imposition of a civil monetary penalty under this section in the same 
manner as such provisions apply with respect to the imposition of a 
penalty under section 1128A of such Act.

SEC. 5257. CIVIL ACTION.

    (a) In General.--An individual who is aggrieved by conduct in 
violation of this subtitle may bring a civil action to recover--
            (1) the greater of actual damages or liquidated damages of 
        $5,000;
            (2) punitive damages;
            (3) a reasonable attorney's fee and expenses of litigation;
            (4) costs of litigation; and
            (5) such preliminary and equitable relief as the court 
        determines to be appropriate.
    (b) Limitation.--No action may be commenced under this section more 
than 3 years after the date on which the violation was or should 
reasonably have been discovered.

                     Subpart C--Criminal Sanctions

SEC. 5261. WRONGFUL DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

    (a) Offense.--A person who knowingly--
            (1) obtains protected health information relating to an 
        individual in violation of this subtitle; or
            (2) discloses protected health information to another 
        person in violation of this subtitle,
shall be punished as provided in subsection (b).
    (b) Penalties.--A person described in subsection (a) shall--
            (1) be fined not more than $50,000, imprisoned not more 
        than 1 year, or both;
            (2) if the offense is committed under false pretenses, be 
        fined not more than $100,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, 
        or both; and
            (3) if the offense is committed with intent to sell, 
        transfer, or use protected health information for commercial 
        advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm, fined not more 
        than $250,000, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.

                   PART 5--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

SEC. 5266. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.

    (a) State Law.--Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and 
(d), this subtitle preempts State law.
    (b) Laws Relating to Public or Mental Health.--Nothing in this 
subtitle shall be construed to preempt or operate to the exclusion of 
any State law relating to public health or mental health that prevents 
or regulates disclosure of protected health information otherwise 
allowed under this subtitle.
    (c) Privileges.--Nothing in this subtitle is intended to preempt or 
modify State common or statutory law to the extent such law concerns a 
privilege of a witness or person in a court of the State. This subtitle 
does not supersede or modify Federal common or statutory law to the 
extent such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in a court 
of the United States. Authorizations pursuant to section 5207 shall not 
be construed as a waiver of any such privilege.
    (d) Certain Duties Under State or Federal Law.--This subtitle shall 
not be construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of--
            (1) any law that provides for the reporting of vital 
        statistics such as birth or death information;
            (2) any law requiring the reporting of abuse or neglect 
        information about any individual;
            (3) subpart II of part E of title XXVI of the Public Health 
        Service Act (relating to notifications of emergency response 
        employees of possible exposure to infectious diseases); or
            (4) any Federal law or regulation governing confidentiality 
        of alcohol and drug patient records.

SEC. 5267. RIGHTS OF INCOMPETENTS.

    (a) Effect of Declaration of Incompetence.--Except as provided in 
section 5268, if an individual has been declared to be incompetent by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, the rights of the individual under 
this subtitle shall be exercised and discharged in the best interests 
of the individual through the individual's representative.
    (b) No Court Declaration.--Except as provided in section 5268, if a 
health care provider determines that an individual, who has not been 
declared to be incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
suffers from a medical condition that prevents the individual from 
acting knowingly or effectively on the individual's own behalf, the 
right of the individual to authorize disclosure may be exercised and 
discharged in the best interest of the individual by the individual's 
representative.

SEC. 5268. EXERCISE OF RIGHTS.

    (a) Individuals Who Are 18 or Legally Capable.--In the case of an 
individual--
            (1) who is 18 years of age or older, all rights of the 
        individual shall be exercised by the individual; or
            (2) who, acting alone, has the legal right, as determined 
        by State law, to apply for and obtain a type of medical 
        examination, care, or treatment and who has sought such 
        examination, care, or treatment, the individual shall exercise 
        all rights of an individual under this subtitle with respect to 
        protected health information relating to such examination, 
        care, or treatment.
    (b) Individuals Under 18.--Except as provided in subsection (a)(2), 
in the case of an individual who is--
            (1) under 14 years of age, all the individual's rights 
        under this subtitle shall be exercised through the parent or 
        legal guardian of the individual; or
            (2) 14, 15, 16, or 17 years of age, the rights of 
        inspection and amendment, and the right to authorize disclosure 
        of protected health information of the individual may be 
        exercised either by the individual or by the parent or legal 
        guardian of the individual.

  Subtitle D--Expanded Efforts To Combat Health Care Fraud and Abuse 
                   Affecting Federal Outlay Programs

                      PART 1--IMPROVED ENFORCEMENT

SEC. 5301. HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND ABUSE AFFECTING FEDERAL OUTLAY 
              PROGRAMS.

    (a) In General.--Not later than January 1, 1995, the Secretary and 
the Attorney General of the United States shall establish a joint 
program--
            (1) to coordinate Federal, State, and local law enforcement 
        programs to control fraud and abuse affecting Federal outlay 
        programs,
            (2) to conduct investigations (including consumer complaint 
        investigations), audits, evaluations, and inspections relating 
        to the delivery of and payment for health care in the United 
        States, and
            (3) to facilitate the enforcement of this subtitle and 
        other statutes applicable to health care fraud and abuse.
    (b) Coordination With Law Enforcement Agencies.--In carrying out 
the program under subsection (a), the Secretary and the Attorney 
General shall consult with, and arrange for the sharing of data and 
resources with Federal, State and local law enforcement agencies, State 
Medicaid Fraud Control Units, and State agencies responsible for the 
licensing and certification of health care providers.
    (c) Coordination With Purchasing Cooperatives and Certified Health 
Plans.--In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Secretary 
and the Attorney General shall consult with, and arrange for the 
sharing of data with representatives of purchasing cooperatives and 
certified standard health plans.
    (d) Authorities of Attorney General and Secretary.--In carrying out 
duties under subsection (a), the Attorney General and the Secretary 
shall--
            (1) conduct, supervise, and coordinate audits, civil and 
        criminal investigations, inspections, and evaluations relating 
        to the program established under such subsection;
            (2) have access (including on-line access as requested and 
        available) to all records available to purchasing cooperatives 
        and certified standard health plans relating to the activities 
        described in paragraph (1) (subject to restrictions based on 
        the confidentiality of certain information under subtitles B 
        and C of this title); and
            (3) issue advisory opinions, fraud alerts, and other 
        appropriate educational material to assist in compliance with 
        the provisions of this subtitle.
    (e) Qualified Immunity for Providing Information.--The provisions 
of section 1157(a) of the Social Security Act (relating to limitation 
on liability) shall apply to a person providing information or 
communications to the Secretary or the Attorney General in conjunction 
with their performance of duties under this section, in the same manner 
as such section applies to information provided to organizations with a 
contract under part 2.
    (f) Use of Powers Under Inspector General Act of 1978.--In carrying 
out duties and responsibilities under the program established under 
subsection (a), the Inspector General is authorized to exercise all 
powers granted under the Inspector General Act of 1978 to the same 
manner and extent as provided in that Act.
    (g) Definitions.--In this subtitle:
            (1) Certified standard health plans; purchasing 
        cooperatives.--The terms ``certified standard health plan'' and 
        ``purchasing cooperative'' have the meanings given such terms 
        by sections 1011(2) and 1013(16), respectively.
            (2) Federal outlay programs.--The term ``Federal outlay 
        programs'' means--
                    (A) any program under title XVIII of the Social 
                Security Act,
                    (B) any State health care program (as defined in 
                section 1128(h) of the Social Security Act),
                    (C) any program under the Public Health Service 
                Act, and
                    (D) any program under this Act, including any State 
                program approved under title I which certifies standard 
                health plans, supplemental health benefits plans, and 
                long-term care policies.
            (3) Inspector general.--The term ``Inspector General'' 
        means the Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
        Human Services.

SEC. 5302. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL OUTLAY PROGRAM FRAUD AND ABUSE 
              CONTROL ACCOUNT.

    (a) Establishment.--
            (1) In general.--There is hereby established an account to 
        be known as the ``Federal Outlay Program Fraud and Abuse 
        Control Account'' (in this section referred to as the ``Anti-
        Fraud Account''). The Anti-Fraud Account shall consist of--
                    (A) such gifts and bequests as may be made as 
                provided in paragraph (2);
                    (B) such amounts as may be deposited in the Anti-
                Fraud Account as provided in section 5311(d)(2) and 
                title IX of the Social Security Act; and
                    (C) such amounts as are transferred to the Anti-
                Fraud Account under paragraph (3).
            (2) Authorization to accept gifts.--The Anti-Fraud Account 
        is authorized to accept on behalf of the United States money 
        gifts and bequests made unconditionally to the Anti-Fraud 
        Account, for the benefit of the Anti-Fraud Account or any 
        activity financed through the Anti-Fraud Account.
            (3) Transfer of amounts.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to the limitation in 
                subparagraph (B), the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
                transfer to the Anti-Fraud Account an amount equal to 
                the sum of the following:
                            (i) Criminal fines imposed in cases 
                        involving a Federal health care offense (as 
                        defined in subsection (d)).
                            (ii) Penalties and damages imposed under 
                        the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729 et seq.), 
                        in cases involving claims related to the 
                        provision of health care items and services 
                        (other than funds awarded to a relator or for 
                        restitution).
                            (iii) Administrative penalties and 
                        assessments imposed under section 5311 (except 
                        as otherwise provided by law).
                            (iv) Amounts resulting from the forfeiture 
                        of property by reason of a Federal health care 
                        offense.
                    (B) Limitation.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
                shall not transfer more than the $75,000,000, plus 50 
                percent of the excess (if any) of the amount described 
                in subparagraph (A) for any fiscal year (beginning in 
                fiscal year 1995).
    (b) Use of Funds.--
            (1) In general.--Amounts in the Anti-Fraud Account shall be 
        available without appropriation and until expended as 
        determined jointly by the Secretary and the Attorney General of 
        the United States in carrying out the Federal Outlay Program 
        Fraud and Abuse Control Program established under section 5301 
        (including the administration of the Program), and may be used 
        to cover costs incurred in operating the Program, including 
        costs of--
                    (A) prosecuting health care matters (through 
                criminal, civil, and administrative proceedings);
                    (B) investigations;
                    (C) financial and performance audits of health care 
                programs and operations;
                    (D) inspections and other evaluations;
                    (E) rewards paid under section 5304; and
                    (F) provider and consumer education (including the 
                provision of advisory opinions) regarding compliance 
                with the provisions of this subtitle.
        Twenty percent of the amounts available in the Anti-Fraud 
        Account for any fiscal year shall be used for costs described 
        in subparagraph (F).
            (2) Funds used to supplement agency appropriations.--It is 
        intended that disbursements made from the Anti-Fraud Account to 
        any Federal agency be used to increase and not supplant the 
        recipient agency's appropriated operating budget.
    (c) Annual Report.--The Secretary and the Attorney General shall 
submit jointly an annual report to Congress on the amount of revenue 
which is generated and disbursed by the Anti-Fraud Account in each 
fiscal year.
    (d) Federal Health Care Offense Defined.--For purposes of 
subsection (a)(3)(A)(i), the term ``Federal health care offense'' means 
a violation of, or a criminal conspiracy to violate--
            (1) sections 226, 668, 1033, or 1347 of title 18, United 
        States Code;
            (2) section 1128B of the Social Security Act;
            (3) sections 287, 371, 664, 666, 1001, 1027, 1341, 1343, or 
        1954 of title 18, United States Code, if the violation or 
        conspiracy relates to health care fraud;
            (4) sections 501 or 511 of the Employee Retirement Income 
        Security Act of 1974, if the violation or conspiracy relates to 
        health care fraud; or
            (5) sections 301, 303(a)(2), or 303 (b) or (e) of the 
        Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act, if the violation or 
        conspiracy relates to health care fraud.

SEC. 5303. USE OF FUNDS BY INSPECTOR GENERAL.

    (a) Reimbursements for Investigations.--
            (1) In general.--The Inspector General is authorized to 
        receive and retain for current use reimbursement for the costs 
        of conducting investigations, when such restitution is ordered 
        by a court, voluntarily agreed to by the payer, or otherwise.
            (2) Crediting.--Funds received by the Inspector General as 
        reimbursement for costs of conducting investigations shall be 
        deposited to the credit of the appropriation from which 
        initially paid, or to appropriations for similar purposes 
        currently available at the time of deposit, and shall remain 
        available for obligation for 1 year from the date of their 
        deposit.
            (3) Exception for forfeitures.--This subsection does not 
        apply to investigative costs paid to the Inspector General from 
        the Department of Justice Asset Forfeiture Fund, which monies 
        shall be deposited and expended in accordance with subsection 
        (b).
    (b) HHS Office of Inspector General Asset Forfeiture Proceeds 
Fund.--
            (1) In general.--There is hereby established the ``HHS 
        Office of Inspector General Asset Forfeiture Proceeds Fund'', 
        to be administered by the Inspector General, which shall be 
        available to the Inspector General without fiscal year 
        limitation for expenses relating to the investigation of 
        matters within the jurisdiction of the Inspector General.
            (2) Deposits.--There shall be deposited in the Fund all 
        proceeds from forfeitures that have been transferred to the 
        Inspector General from the Department of Justice Asset 
        Forfeiture Fund under section 524 of title 28, United States 
        Code.

SEC. 5304. REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO PROSECUTION AND 
              CONVICTION.

    (a) In General.--In special circumstances, the Secretary and the 
Attorney General of the United States may jointly make a payment of up 
to $10,000 to a person who furnishes information unknown to the 
Government relating to a possible prosecution of a Federal health care 
offense (as defined in section 5302(d)).
    (b) Ineligible Persons.--A person is not eligible for a payment 
under subsection (a) if--
            (1) the person is a current or former officer or employee 
        of a Federal or State government agency or instrumentality who 
        furnishes information discovered or gathered in the course of 
        government employment;
            (2) the person knowingly participated in the offense;
            (3) the information furnished by the person consists of 
        allegations or transactions that have been disclosed to the 
        public--
                    (A) in a criminal, civil, or administrative 
                proceeding;
                    (B) in a congressional, administrative, or General 
                Accounting Office report, hearing, audit, or 
                investigation; or
                    (C) by the news media, unless the person is the 
                original source of the information; or
            (4) when, in the judgment of the Attorney General, it 
        appears that a person whose illegal activities are being 
        prosecuted or investigated could benefit from the award.
    (c) Definition.--For the purposes of subsection (b)(3)(C), the term 
``original source'' means a person who has direct and independent 
knowledge of the information that is furnished and has voluntarily 
provided the information to the government prior to disclosure by the 
news media.
    (d) No Judicial Review.--Neither the failure of the Secretary and 
the Attorney General to authorize a payment under subsection (a) nor 
the amount authorized shall be subject to judicial review.

              PART 2--CIVIL PENALTIES AND RIGHTS OF ACTION

SEC. 5311. CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES.

    (a) Actions Subject to Penalty.--
            (1) In general.--Any person who is determined by the 
        Secretary to have committed any action with respect to a 
        certified standard health plan or certified long-term care plan 
        or long-term care services provided under this Act that would 
        subject the person to a penalty under paragraphs (1) through 
        (11) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act if the action 
        was taken with respect to title V, XVIII, XIX, or XX of such 
        Act, shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with 
        subsection (b).
            (2) Treatment of amounts recovered.--Any amounts recovered 
        under the preceding sentence shall be paid to the Secretary and 
        such portions of the amounts recovered as is determined to have 
        been improperly paid from a certified standard health plan or 
        certified long-term care policy for the delivery of or payment 
        for health care items or services shall be repaid to such plan 
        or policy (and enrollees of such plan or policy as appropriate) 
        and the remainder of the amounts recovered shall be deposited 
        in the Federal Outlays Program Fraud and Abuse Control Account 
        established under section 5302.
    (b) Penalties.--
            (1) General rule.--In the case of a person who the 
        Secretary determines has committed an action described in 
        subsection (a), the person shall be subject to the civil 
        monetary penalty (together with any additional assessment) to 
        which the person would be subject to under section 1128A of the 
        Social Security Act if the action was taken with respect to 
        title V, XVIII, XIX, or XX of such Act.
            (2) Penalties described.--Section 1128A(a) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting 
                ``$10,000''; and
                    (B) by striking ``twice the amount claimed'' and 
                inserting ``3 times the amount claimed''.
            (3) Interest on penalties.--Section 1128A(f) of such Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(f)) is amended by adding after the first 
        sentence the following: ``Interest shall accrue on the 
        penalties and assessments imposed by a final determination of 
        the Secretary in accordance with an annual rate established by 
        the Secretary under the Federal Claims Collection Act. The rate 
        of interest charged shall be the rate in effect on the date the 
        determination becomes final and shall remain fixed at that rate 
        until the entire amount due is paid. In addition, the Secretary 
        is authorized to recover the costs of collection in any case 
        where such penalties and assessments are not paid within 30 
        days after the determination becomes final, or in the case of a 
        compromised amount, where payments are more than 90 days past 
        due. In lieu of actual costs, the Secretary is authorized to 
        impose a charge of up to 10 percent of the amount of such 
        penalties and assessments owed to cover the costs of 
        collection.''.
    (c) Additional Offenses.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1128A(a) of the Social Security 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraphs (1) 
                and (2);
                    (B) by striking the comma at the end of paragraph 
                (2) and inserting a semicolon; and
                    (C) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following 
                new paragraphs:
            ``(4) offers, pays, or transfers remuneration to any 
        individual eligible for benefits under title XVIII of this Act, 
        or under a Federal outlay program (as defined in section 
        5301(g)(1) of the Health Security Act) that such person knows 
        or should know is likely to influence such individual to order 
        or receive from a particular provider, practitioner, or 
        supplier any item or service for which payment may be made, in 
        whole or in part, under title XVIII, or a Federal outlay 
        program;
            ``(5) in the case of a person who is not an organization, 
        agency, or other entity, who is excluded from participating in 
        a program under title XVIII or a Federal outlay program in 
        accordance with this section, section 1128, or section 1156 and 
        who, during the period of exclusion, retains either a direct or 
        indirect ownership or control interest of 5 percent or more in, 
        or an ownership or control interest (as defined in section 
        1124(a)(3)) in, or who is an officer, director, agent, or 
        managing employee (as defined in section 1126(b)) of, an entity 
        that is participating in a program under title XVIII;
            ``(6) engages in a practice that circumvents a payment 
        methodology intended to reimburse for two or more discreet 
        medical items or services at a single or fixed amount, 
        including but not limited to, multiple admissions or 
        readmission to hospitals and other institutions reimbursed on a 
        diagnosis reimbursement grouping basis;
            ``(7) engages in a practice which has the effect of 
        limiting (as compared to other plan enrollees) the appropriate 
        utilization of health care services covered by law or under the 
        service contract by title XIX or other publicly subsidized 
        patients, including but not limited to differential standards 
        for the location and hours of service offered by providers 
        participating in the plan;
            ``(8) fails to comply with a quality assurance program or a 
        utilization review activity;
            ``(9) employs or contracts with any individual or entity 
        who is excluded from participating in a program under title 
        XVIII or a Federal outlay program in accordance with this 
        section, section 1128, or section 1156, for the provision of 
        any services (including but not limited to health care, 
        utilization review, medical social work, or administrative), or 
        employs or contracts with any entity for the direct or indirect 
        provision of such services, through such an excluded individual 
        or entity; or
            ``(10) submits false or fraudulent statements, data or 
        information, or claims to the Secretary, the Secretary of 
        Labor,any other Federal agency, a State health care agency, a 
        purchasing cooperative (under subtitle 2/32/3 of title 2/32/3 
        of the Health Security Act), or any other Federal, State or 
        local agency charged with implementation or oversight of a 
        certified health plan under this Act or a public program that 
        the person knows or should know is fraudulent;''.
            (2) Remuneration defined.--Section 1128A(i) of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1320a-7a(i)) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new paragraph:
            ``(6) The term `remuneration' includes the waiver of 
        coinsurance and deductible amounts (or any part thereof), and 
        transfers of items or services for free or for other than fair 
        market value, except that such term does not include the waiver 
        of coinsurance or deductible amounts by a person or entity, 
        if--
                    ``(A) the waiver is not offered as part of any 
                advertisement or solicitation;
                    ``(B) the person does not routinely waive 
                coinsurance or deductible amounts; and
                    ``(C) the person--
                            ``(i) waives the coinsurance and deductible 
                        amounts after determining in good faith that 
                        the individual is indigent;
                            ``(ii) fails to collect coinsurance or 
                        deductible amounts after making reasonable 
                        collection efforts; or
                            ``(iii) provides for any permissible waiver 
                        as specified in section 1128B(b)(3) or in 
                        regulations issued by the Secretary.''.
            (3) Claim for item or service based on incorrect coding or 
        medically unnecessary services.--Section 1128A(a)(1) of such 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)(1)) is amended--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``claimed,'' 
                and inserting the following: ``claimed, including any 
                person who presents or causes to be presented a claim 
                for an item or service which includes a procedure or 
                diagnosis code that the person knows or should know 
                will result in a greater payment to the person than the 
                code applicable to the item or service actually 
                provided or actual patient medical condition,'';
                    (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``or'' at the 
                end;
                    (C) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``; or'' and 
                inserting ``, or''; and
                    (D) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the 
                following new subparagraph:
                    ``(E) is for a medical or other item or service 
                that a person knows or should know is not medically 
                necessary; or''.
    (c) Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--
            (1) Applicability of procedures under social security 
        act.--Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2), the 
        provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other 
        than subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of 
        subsection (f)) shall apply to the imposition of a civil 
        monetary penalty, assessment, or exclusion under this section 
        in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the 
        imposition of a penalty, assessment, or exclusion under section 
        1128A of such Act.
            (4) Authority of secretary of labor to impose penalties, 
        assessments, and exclusions.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary of Labor may 
                initiate an action to impose a civil monetary penalty, 
                assessment, or exclusion under this section with 
                respect to actions relating to a certified multistate 
                self-insured health plan if authorized by the Attorney 
                General of the United States and the Secretary pursuant 
                to regulations promulgated by the Secretary in 
                consultation with the Attorney General.
                    (B) Regulations described.--Under the regulations 
                promulgated under subparagraph (A), the Attorney 
                General and the Secretary shall review an action 
                proposed by the Secretary of Labor, and not later than 
                60 days after receiving notice of the proposed action 
                from the Secretary of Labor, shall--
                            (i) approve the proposed action to be taken 
                        by the Secretary of Labor;
                            (ii) disapprove the proposed action; or
                            (iii) assume responsibility for initiating 
                        a criminal, civil, or administrative action 
                        based on the information provided in the 
                        notice.
                    (C) Action deemed approved.--If the Attorney 
                General and the Secretary fail to respond to a proposed 
                action by the Secretary of Labor within the period 
                described in paragraph (2), the Attorney General and 
                the Secretary shall be deemed to have approved the 
                proposed action to be taken by the Secretary of Labor.
    (e) Notification of Licensing Authorities.--Whenever the 
Secretary's determination to impose a penalty, assessment, or exclusion 
under this section becomes final, the Secretary shall notify the 
appropriate State or local licensing agency or organization (including 
the agency specified in section 1864(a) and 1902(a)(33) of the Social 
Security Act) that such a penalty, assessment, or exclusion has become 
final and the reasons therefore.

SEC. 5312. PERMITTING PARTIES TO BRING ACTIONS ON OWN BEHALF.

    (a) In General.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), a certified 
standard health plan (as defined in section 1011(2)) or an experience-
rated employer (as defined in section 1011(5)(E)) that suffers harm or 
monetary loss exceeding the sum or value of $10,000 (excluding 
interest) as a result of any activity of an individual or entity which 
makes the individual or entity subject to a civil monetary penalty 
under section 5311 may, in a civil action against the individual or 
entity in the United States District Court, obtain treble damages and 
costs including attorneys' fees against the individual or entity and 
such equitable relief as is appropriate.
    (b) Requirements for Bringing Action.--A person may bring a civil 
action under this section only if--
            (1) the person provides the Secretary with written notice 
        of--
                    (A) the person's intent to bring an action under 
                this section,
                    (B) the identities of the individuals or entities 
                the person intends to name as defendants to the action, 
                and
                    (C) all information the person possesses regarding 
                the activity that is the subject of the action that may 
                materially affect the Secretary's decision to initiate 
                a proceeding to impose a civil monetary penalty under 
                section 5311 against the defendants, and
            (2) one of the following conditions is met:
                    (A) During the 60-day period that begins on the 
                date the Secretary receives the written notice 
                described in paragraph (1), the Secretary does not 
                notify the person that the Secretary intends to 
                initiate an investigation to determine whether to 
                impose a civil monetary penalty under section 5311 
                against the defendants.
                    (B) The Secretary notifies the person during the 
                60-day period described in subparagraph (A) that the 
                Secretary intends to initiate an investigation to 
                determine whether to impose a civil monetary penalty 
                under such section against the defendants, and the 
                Secretary subsequently notifies the person that the 
                Secretary no longer intends to initiate an 
                investigation or proceeding to impose a civil monetary 
                penalty against the defendants.
                    (C) After the expiration of the 1-year period that 
                begins on the date written notice is provided to the 
                Secretary, the Secretary has not initiated a proceeding 
                to impose a civil monetary penalty against the 
                defendants.
    (c) Treatment of Excess Awards.--If a person is awarded any amounts 
in an action brought under this section that are in excess of the 
damages suffered by the person as a result of the defendant's 
activities, 20 percent of such amounts shall be withheld from the 
person for payment into the Federal Outlays Program Fraud and Abuse 
Control Account established under section 5302.
    (d) Statute of Limitations.--No action may be brought under this 
section more than 6 years after the date of the activity with respect 
to which the action is brought.
    (e) No Limitation on Other Actions.--Nothing in this section shall 
limit the right of any person to pursue any other right of action or 
remedy available under the law.
    (f) Pendant Jurisdiction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed, by reason of a claim arising under this section, to confer 
on the Courts of the United States jurisdiction over any State law 
claim.

SEC. 5313. EXCLUSION FROM PROGRAM PARTICIPATION.

    (a) Mandatory Exclusion.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        Secretary shall exclude an individual or entity from 
        participating in any applicable health plan if the individual 
        or entity--
                    (A) is excluded from participation in a public 
                program under, or is otherwise described in, section 
                1128(a) of the Social Security Act (relating to 
                individuals and entities convicted of health care-
                related crimes or patient abuse);
                    (B) has been convicted after the date of the 
                enactment of this section, under Federal or State law, 
                in connection with the delivery of a health care item 
                or service of a criminal offense consisting of a felony 
                relating to fraud, theft, embezzlement, breach of 
                fiduciary responsibility, or other financial 
                misconduct; or
                    (C) has been convicted after such date, under 
                Federal or State law, of a criminal offense consisting 
                of a felony relating to the unlawful manufacture, 
                distribution, prescription, or dispensing of a 
                controlled substance.
    (2) Waiver permitted.--
            (A) In general.--When, in the opinion of the Secretary, 
        mandatory exclusion under paragraph (1) of an individual or 
        entity would significantly harm the public health or pose a 
        significant risk to the public health, the Secretary may waive 
        such exclusion and shall apply such other appropriate penalties 
        as authorized under this subtitle.
            (B) Application for waiver of exclusion.--
                    (i) In general.--An individual or entity subject to 
                mandatory exclusion under this subsection may apply to 
                the Secretary, in a manner specified by the Secretary 
                in regulations, for waiver of the exclusion.
                    (ii) Secretarial response.--The Secretary may waive 
                the exclusion for the reasons described in subparagraph 
                (A).
    (b) Permissive Exclusion.--The Secretary may exclude and individual 
or entity from participating in any applicable health plan if the 
individual or entity--
            (1) is excluded from participation in a public program 
        under, or is otherwise described in, section 1128(b) of the 
        Social Security Act (other than paragraphs (3), (6)(A), (6)(C), 
        (6)(D), (10), or (13) of such section);
            (2) has been convicted after the date of the enactment of 
        this section, under Federal or State law, in connection with 
        the delivery of a health care item or service of a criminal 
        offense consisting of a misdemeanor relating to fraud, theft, 
        embezzlement, breach of fiduciary responsibility, or other 
        financial misconduct; or
            (3) has been convicted after the date of the enactment of 
        this section, under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense 
        consisting of a misdemeanor relating to the unlawful 
        manufacture, distribution, prescription, or dispensing of a 
        controlled substance.
    (c) Period of Exclusion.--
            (1) Notice of exclusion.--An exclusion under this section 
        shall be effective at such time and upon such reasonable notice 
        to the public and to the individual or entity excluded as may 
        be specified in regulations consistent with paragraph (2).
            (2) Effective date of exclusion.--Such an exclusion shall 
        be effective with respect to services furnished to an 
        individual on or after the effective date of the exclusion.
            (3) Period of exclusion.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary shall specify, in 
                the notice of exclusion under paragraph (1), the 
                minimum period (or, in the case of an exclusion of an 
                individual excluded from participation in a public 
                program under, or is otherwise described in, section 
                1128(b)(12) of the Social Security Act, the period) of 
                the exclusion.
                    (B) Minimum period for mandatory exclusions.--In 
                the case of a mandatory exclusion under subsection (a), 
                the minimum period of exclusion shall be not less than 
                2 years.
                    (C) Minimum period for certain permissive 
                exclusions.--
                            (i) Fraud, obstruction of investigation, 
                        and controlled substance conviction.--In the 
                        case of an exclusion of an individual excluded 
                        from participation in a public program under, 
                        or is otherwise described in, paragraph (1) or 
                        (2) of section 1128(b) of the Social Security 
                        Act or paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection 
                        (b) of this section, the period of exclusion 
                        shall be a minimum of 1 year, unless the 
                        Secretary determines that a longer period is 
                        necessary because of aggravating circumstances.
                            (ii) Suspensions.--In the case of an 
                        exclusion of an individual or entity excluded 
                        from participation in a public program under, 
                        or is otherwise described in, paragraph (4), 
                        (5)(A), or (5)(B) of section 1128(b) of the 
                        Social Security Act, the period of the 
                        exclusion shall not be less than the period 
                        during which the individual's or entity's 
                        license to provide health care is revoked, 
                        suspended or surrendered, or the individual or 
                        the entity is excluded or suspended from a 
                        Federal or State health care program.
                            (iii) Unnecessary services.--In the case of 
                        an exclusion of an individual or entity 
                        described in paragraph (6)(B) of section 
                        1128(b) of the Social Security Act, the period 
                        of the exclusion shall be not less than 1 year.
    (d) Notice to Entities Administering Public Programs for the 
Delivery of or Payment for Health Care Items or Services.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall exercise the authority 
        under this section in a manner that results in an individual's 
        or entity's exclusion from all certified standard health plans 
        under such program for the delivery of or payment for health 
        care items or services.
            (2) Notification.--The Secretary shall promptly notify each 
        sponsor of an applicable health plan and each entity that 
        administers a State health care program described in section 
        1128(h) of the Social Security Act of the fact and 
        circumstances of each exclusion (together with the period 
        thereof) effected against an individual or entity under this 
        section or under section 5311(b)(3).
    (e) Notice to State Licensing Agencies.--The provisions of section 
1128(e) of the Social Security Act shall apply to this section in the 
same manner as such provisions apply to sections 1128 and 1128A of such 
Act.
    (f) Notice, Hearing, and Judicial Review.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), any individual 
        or entity that is excluded (or directed to be excluded) from 
        participation under this section is entitled to reasonable 
        notice and opportunity for a hearing thereon by the Secretary 
        to the same extent as is provided in section 205(b) of the 
        Social Security Act, and to judicial review of the Secretary's 
        final decision after such hearing as is provided in section 
        205(g) of such Act, except that such action shall be brought in 
        the Court of Appeals of the United States for the judicial 
        circuit in which the individual or entity resides, or has a 
        principal place of business, or, if the individual or entity 
        does not reside or have a principal place of business within 
        any such judicial circuit, in the United States Court of 
        Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
            (2) Administrative hearing.--Unless the Secretary 
        determines that the health or safety of individuals receiving 
        services warrants the exclusion taking effect earlier, any 
        individual or entity that is the subject of an adverse 
        determination based on paragraphs (6)(B), (7), (8), (9), (11), 
        (12), (14), or (15) of section 1128(b) of the Social Security 
        Act, shall be entitled to a hearing by an administrative law 
        judge (as provided under section 205(b) of the Social Security 
        Act) on the determination before any exclusion based upon the 
        determination takes effect. If a hearing is requested, the 
        exclusion shall be effective upon the issuance of an order by 
        the administrative law judge upholding the determination of the 
        Secretary to exclude.
    (g) Convicted Defined.--In this section, the term ``convicted'' has 
the meaning given such term in section 1128(i) of the Social Security 
Act.
    (h) Request for Exclusion.--
            (1) In general.--The sponsor of any standard health plan, 
        the board of any purchasing cooperative, and the Secretary of 
        Labor in the case of a multistate self-insured health plan may 
        request that the Secretary of Health and Human Services exclude 
        an individual or entity with respect to actions under a 
        certified health plan in accordance with this section.
            (2) Response by secretary.--
                    (A) In general.--An individual or entity excluded 
                (or directed to be excluded) from participation under 
                this section or section 5411(b)(3) may apply to the 
                Secretary, in a manner specified by the Secretary in 
                regulations and at the end of the minimum period of 
                exclusion (or, in the case of an individual or entity 
                described in section 1128(b)(12) of the Social Security 
                Act, the period of exclusion) provided under this 
                section or section 5411(b)(3) and at such other times 
                as the Secretary may provide, for termination of the 
                exclusion.
                    (B) Secretarial response.--The Secretary may 
                terminate the exclusion if the Secretary determines, on 
                the basis of the conduct of the applicant which 
                occurred after the date of the notice of exclusion or 
                which was unknown to the Secretary at the time of the 
                exclusion, that--
                            (i) there is no basis under this section or 
                        section 5411(b)(3) for a continuation of the 
                        exclusion, and
                            (ii) there are reasonable assurances that 
                        the types of actions which formed the basis for 
                        the original exclusion have not recurred and 
                        will not recur.
                    (C) Notification of termination.--The Secretary 
                shall promptly notify each sponsor of an applicable 
                health plan and each entity that administers a State 
                health care program described in section 1128(h) of the 
                Social Security Act of each termination of exclusion 
                made under this paragraph.
    (i) Effect of Exclusion.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this Act, no payment may be made under a certified standard health plan 
for the delivery of or payment for any item or service (other than an 
emergency item or service, not including items or services furnished in 
an emergency room of a hospital) furnished--
            (1) by an individual or entity during the period when such 
        individual or entity is excluded pursuant to this section from 
        participation in a certified standard health plan; or
            (2) at the medical direction or on the prescription of a 
        physician during the period when the physician is excluded 
        pursuant to this section from participation in a certified 
        health plan and the person furnishing the item or service knew 
        or had reason to know of the exclusion (after a reasonable time 
        period after reasonable notice has been furnished to the 
        person).

                   PART 3--AMENDMENTS TO CRIMINAL LAW

SEC. 5321. HEALTH CARE FRAUD.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1347. Health care fraud
    ``(a) Whoever knowingly executes, or attempts to execute, a scheme 
or artifice--
            ``(1) to defraud any purchasing cooperative, certified 
        standard health plan, certified long-term care insurance 
        policy, or other person, in connection with the delivery of or 
        payment for health care benefits, items, or services; or
            ``(2) to obtain, by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, 
        representations, or promises, any of the money or property 
        owned by, or under the custody or control of, any purchasing 
        cooperative, certified standard health plan, certified long-
        term care insurance policy, or person in connection with the 
        delivery of or payment for health care benefits, items, or 
        services;
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, 
or both. If the violation results in serious bodily injury (as defined 
in section 1365 of this title) such person shall be imprisoned for any 
term of years.
    ``(b) As used in this section the terms `purchasing cooperative', 
`certified standard health plan', and `certified long-term care 
insurance policy' have the meanings given those terms in sections 
1013(16), 1011(2), and 1011(4) of the Health Security Act, 
respectively.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``1347. Health care fraud.''.

SEC. 5322. THEFT OR EMBEZZLEMENT.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 31 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 668. Theft or embezzlement in connection with health care
    ``(a) Whoever embezzles, steals, willfully and unlawfully converts 
to the use of any person other than the rightful owner, or 
intentionally misapplies any of the moneys, securities, premiums, 
credits, property, or other assets of a purchasing cooperative, 
certified standard health plan, certified long-term care insurance 
policy, or of any fund connected with such a cooperative, plan, or 
policy, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 
years, or both.
    ``(b) As used in this section, the terms `purchasing cooperative', 
`certified standard health plan', and `certified long-term care 
insurance policy' have the meanings given those terms in sections 
1013(16), 1011(2), and 1011(4) of the Health Security Act, 
respectively.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 31 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``668. Theft or embezzlement in connection with health care.''.

SEC. 5323. FALSE STATEMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1033. False statements relating to health care matters
    ``(a) Whoever, in any matter involving a purchasing cooperative, 
certified standard health plan, or certified long-term care insurance 
policy, knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals, or covers up by 
any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, or makes any false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent statements or representations, or makes or 
uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any 
false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry, shall be fined 
under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
    ``(b) As used in this section, the terms `purchasing cooperative', 
`certified standard health plan', and `certified long-term care 
insurance policy' have the meanings given those terms in sections 
1013(16), 1011(2), and 1011(4) of the Health Security Act, 
respectively.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``1033. False statements relating to health care matters.''.

SEC. 5324. BRIBERY AND GRAFT.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 11 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 226. Bribery and graft in connection with health care
    ``(a) Whoever--
            ``(1) directly or indirectly, corruptly gives, offers, or 
        promises anything of value to a health care official, or offers 
        or promises a health care official to give anything of value to 
        any other person, with intent--
                    ``(A) to influence any of the health care 
                official's actions, decisions, or duties relating to a 
                purchasing cooperative, certified standard health plan, 
                or certified long-term care insurance policy;
                    ``(B) to influence such an official to commit or 
                aid in the committing, or collude in or allow, any 
                fraud, or make opportunity for the commission of any 
                fraud, on a purchasing cooperative, certified standard 
                health plan, or certified long-term care insurance 
                policy; or
                    ``(C) to induce such an official to engage in any 
                conduct in violation of the lawful duty of such 
                official; or
            ``(2) being a health care official, directly or indirectly, 
        corruptly demands, seeks, receives, accepts, or agrees to 
        accept anything of value personally or for any other person or 
        entity, the giving of which violates paragraph (1) of this 
        subsection;
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 15 years, 
or both.
    ``(b) Whoever, otherwise than as provided by law for the proper 
discharge of any duty, directly or indirectly gives, offers, or 
promises anything of value to a health care official, for or because of 
any of the health care official's actions, decisions, or duties 
relating to a purchasing cooperative, certified standard health plan, 
or certified long-term care insurance policy, shall be fined under this 
title or imprisoned not more than two years, or both.
    ``(c) As used in this section--
            ``(1) the term `health care official' means--
                    ``(A) an administrator, officer, trustee, 
                fiduciary, custodian, counsel, agent, or employee of 
                any purchasing cooperative, certified standard health 
                plan, or certified long-term care insurance policy;
                    ``(B) an officer, counsel, agent, or employee, of 
                an organization that provides services under contract 
                to any purchasing cooperative, certified standard 
                health plan, or certified long-term care insurance 
                policy;
                    ``(C) an official or employee of a State agency 
                having regulatory authority over any purchasing 
                cooperative, certified standard health plan, or 
                certified long-term care insurance policy;
                    ``(D) an officer, counsel, agent, or employee of a 
                health care sponsor;
            ``(2) the term `health care sponsor' means any individual 
        or entity serving as the sponsor of a certified health plan for 
        purposes of the Health Security Act, and includes the joint 
        board of trustees or other similar body used by two or more 
        employers to administer a certified standard health plan for 
        purposes of such Act; and
            ``(3) the terms `purchasing cooperative', `certified 
        standard health plan', and `certified long-term care insurance 
        policy' have the meanings given those terms in sections 
        1013(16), 1011(2), and 1011(4) of the Health Security Act, 
        respectively.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of 
chapter 11 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``226. Bribery and graft in connection with health care.''.

SEC. 5325. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF RELATING TO HEALTH CARE OFFENSES.

    Section 1345(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
            (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A);
            (2) by inserting ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B); and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(C) committing or about to commit a Federal health care 
        offense (as defined in section 5302(d) of the Health Security 
        Act);''.

SEC. 5326. GRAND JURY DISCLOSURE.

    Section 3322 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
            (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
        (d) and (e), respectively; and
            (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
    ``(c) A person who is privy to grand jury information concerning a 
health law violation--
            ``(1) received in the course of duty as an attorney for the 
        Government; or
            ``(2) disclosed under rule 6(e)(3)(A)(ii) of the Federal 
        Rules of Criminal Procedure;
may disclose that information to an attorney for the Government to use 
in any civil proceeding related to a Federal health care offense (as 
defined in section 5302(d) of the Health Security Act).''.

SEC. 5327. FORFEITURES FOR VIOLATIONS OF FRAUD STATUTES.

    Section 982(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
    ``(6) The court, in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a 
Federal health care offense (as defined in section 5302(d) of the 
Health Security Act), shall order such person to forfeit to the United 
States any property, real or personal, constituting or traceable to the 
gross proceeds obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of the 
commission of the offense.''.

              PART 4--AMENDMENTS TO CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT

SEC. 5331. AMENDMENTS TO CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT.

    Section 3729 of title 31, United States Code, is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a)(7), by inserting ``or to a certified 
        standard health plan or certified long-term care insurance 
        policy'' after ``property to the Government'';
            (2) in the matter following subsection (a)(7), by inserting 
        ``or certified standard health plan or certified long-term care 
        insurance policy'' before ``sustains because of the act of that 
        person,'';
            (3) at the end of the first sentence of subsection (a), by 
        inserting ``or certified standard health plan or certified 
        long-term care insurance policy'' before ``sustains because of 
        the act of the person.'';
            (4) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) by inserting ``the term'' after ``section,''; 
                and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following: ``The term 
                also includes any request or demand, whether under 
                contract of otherwise, for money or property which is 
                made or presented to a certified standard health plan 
                or certified long-term care insurance policy.''; and
            (5) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(f) Certified Standard Health Plan and Certified Long-Term Care 
Insurance Policy Defined.--For purposes of this section, the terms 
`purchasing cooperative', `certified standard health plan', and 
`certified long-term care insurance policy' have the meanings given 
those terms in sections 1013(16), 1011(2), and 1011(4) of the Health 
Security Act, respectively.''.

                         PART 5--EFFECTIVE DATE

SEC. 5341. EFFECTIVE DATE.

    Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the provisions of, 
and amendments made by, this subtitle shall be effective on and after 
January 1, 1996.

                  Subtitle E--Medical Liability Reform

                         PART 1--SYSTEM REFORMS

SEC. 5401. FEDERAL TORT REFORM.

    (a) Applicability.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in section 5402, this 
        subtitle shall apply with respect to any medical malpractice 
        liability action brought in any State or Federal court, except 
        that this subtitle shall not apply to a claim or action for 
        damages arising from a vaccine-related injury or death to the 
        extent that title XXI of the Public Health Service Act applies 
        to the claim or action.
            (2) Preemption.--The provisions of this subtitle shall 
        preempt any State law to the extent that such law is 
        inconsistent with the limitations contained in such provisions.
            (3) Effect on sovereign immunity and choice of law or 
        venue.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to--
                    (A) waive or affect any defense of sovereign 
                immunity asserted by any State under any provision of 
                law;
                    (B) waive or affect any defense of sovereign 
                immunity asserted by the United States;
                    (C) affect the applicability of any provision of 
                the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976;
                    (D) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect 
                to claims brought by a foreign nation or a citizen of a 
                foreign nation; or
                    (E) affect the right of any court to transfer venue 
                or to apply the law of a foreign nation or to dismiss a 
                claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen of a foreign 
                nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
            (4) Federal court jurisdiction not established on federal 
        question grounds.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed 
        to establish any jurisdiction in the district courts of the 
        United States over medical malpractice liability actions on the 
        basis of section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code.
    (b) Definitions.--In this subtitle, the following definitions 
apply:
            (1) Alternative dispute resolution system; ADR.--The term 
        ``alternative dispute resolution system'' or ``ADR'' means a 
        system that provides for the resolution of medical malpractice 
        claims in a manner other than through medical malpractice 
        liability actions.
            (2) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who 
        alleges a medical malpractice claim, and any person on whose 
        behalf such a claim is alleged, including the decedent in the 
        case of an action brought through or on behalf of an estate.
            (3) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
        professional'' means any individual who provides health care 
        services in a State and who is required by the laws or 
        regulations of the State to be licensed or certified by the 
        State to provide such services in the State.
            (4) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
        provider'' means any organization or institution that is 
        engaged in the delivery of health care services in a State and 
        that is required by the laws or regulations of the State to be 
        licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
        such services in the State.
            (5) Injury.--The term ``injury'' means any illness, 
        disease, or other harm that is the subject of a medical 
        malpractice liability action or a medical malpractice claim.
            (6) Medical malpractice liability action.--The term 
        ``medical malpractice liability action'' means a cause of 
        action brought in a State or Federal court against a health 
        care provider or health care professional by which the 
        plaintiff brings a medical malpractice claim.
            (7) Medical malpractice claim.--The term ``medical 
        malpractice claim'' means a claim brought against a health care 
        provider or health care professional in which a claimant 
        alleges that injury was caused by the provision of (or the 
        failure to provide) health care services, except that such term 
        does not include--
                    (A) any claim based on an allegation of an 
                intentional tort;
                    (B) any claim based on an allegation that a product 
                is defective that is brought against any individual or 
                entity that is not a health care professional or health 
                care provider; or
                    (C) any claim brought pursuant to subtitle F.

SEC. 5402. STATE-BASED ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS.

    (a) Application to Malpractice Claims Under Plans.--Prior to or 
immediately following the commencement of any medical malpractice 
action, the parties shall participate in the alternative dispute 
resolution system administered by the State under subsection (b). Such 
participation shall be in lieu of any other provision of Federal or 
State law or any contractual agreement made by or on behalf of the 
parties prior to the commencement of the medical malpractice action.
    (b) Adoption of Mechanism by State.--Each State shall--
            (1) maintain or adopt at least one of the alternative 
        dispute resolution methods satisfying the requirements 
        specified under subsection (c) and (d) for the resolution of 
        medical malpractice claims arising from the provision of (or 
        failure to provide) health care services to individuals 
        enrolled in a standard health plan; and
            (2) clearly disclose to enrollees (and potential enrollees) 
        the availability and procedures for consumer grievances, 
        including a description of the alternative dispute resolution 
        method or methods adopted under this subsection.
    (c) Specification of Permissible Alternative Dispute Resolution 
Methods.--
            (1) In general.--The Attorney General, in consultation with 
        the Secretary, shall, by regulation, develop alternative 
        dispute resolution methods for the use by States in resolving 
        medical malpractice claims under subsection (a). Such methods 
        shall include at least the following:
                    (A) Arbitration.--The use of arbitration, a nonjury 
                adversarial dispute resolution process which may, 
                subject to subsection (d), result in a final decision 
                as to facts, law, liability or damages.
                    (B) Claimant-requested binding arbitration.--For 
                claims involving a sum of money that falls below a 
                threshold amount set by the Secretary, the use of 
                arbitration not subject to subsection (d). Such binding 
                arbitration shall be at the sole discretion of the 
                claimant.
                    (C) Mediation.--The use of mediation, a settlement 
                process coordinated by a neutral third party without 
                the ultimate rendering of a formal opinion as to 
                factual or legal findings.
                    (D) Early neutral evaluation.--The use of early 
                neutral evaluation, in which the parties make a 
                presentation to a neutral attorney or other neutral 
                evaluator for an assessment of the merits, to encourage 
                settlement. If the parties do not settle as a result of 
                assessment and proceed to trial, the neutral 
                evaluator's opinion shall be kept confidential.
            (2) Standards for establishing methods.--In developing 
        alternative dispute resolution methods under paragraph (1), the 
        Attorney General shall assure that the methods promote the 
        resolution of medical malpractice claims in a manner that--
                    (A) is affordable for the parties involved;
                    (B) provides for timely resolution of claims;
                    (C) provides for the consistent and fair resolution 
                of claims; and
                    (D) provides for reasonably convenient access to 
                dispute resolution for individuals enrolled in plans.
            (3) Waiver authority.--Upon application of a State, the 
        Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary, may grant 
        the State the authority to fulfill the requirement of 
        subsection (b) by adopting a mechanism other than a mechanism 
        established by the Attorney General pursuant to this 
        subsection, except that such mechanism must meet the standards 
        set forth in paragraph (2).
    (d) Further Redress.--Except with respect to the claimant-requested 
binding arbitration method set forth in subsection (c)(1)(B), and 
notwithstanding any other provision of a law or contractual agreement, 
a plan enrollee dissatisfied with the determination reached as a result 
of an alternative dispute resolution method applied under this section 
may, after the final resolution of the enrollee's claim under the 
method, initiate or resume a cause of action to seek damages or other 
redress with respect to the claim to the extent otherwise permitted 
under State law. The results of any alternative dispute resolution 
procedure are inadmissible at any subsequent trial, as are all 
statements, offers, and other communications made during such 
procedures, unless otherwise admissible under State law.

SEC. 5403. REQUIREMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF MERIT.

    (a) Requiring Submission With Complaint.--Except as provided in 
subsection (c) and subject to the penalties of subsection (e), no 
medical malpractice liability action may be brought by any individual 
unless, at the time the individual commences such action, the 
individual or the individual's attorney submits an affidavit declaring 
that--
            (1) the individual (or the individual's attorney) has 
        consulted and reviewed the facts of the claim with a qualified 
        specialist (as defined in subsection (d));
            (2) the individual or the individual's attorney has 
        obtained a written report by a qualified specialist that 
        clearly identifies the individual and that includes the 
        specialist's determination that, based upon a review of the 
        available medical record and other relevant material, a 
        reasonable medical interpretation of the facts supports a 
        finding that the claim against the defendant is meritorious and 
        based on good cause; and
            (3) on the basis of the qualified specialist's review and 
        consultation, the individual (or the individual's attorney) has 
        concluded that the claim is meritorious and based on good 
        cause.
    (b) Identity of Specialist.--Only upon a showing of good cause may 
a court order that the identity of the specialist used for purposes of 
subsection (a) be revealed. In such an event, such identity shall be 
reviewed by the court on an in camera basis only.
    (c) Extension in Certain Instances.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsection (a) 
        shall not apply with respect to an individual who brings a 
        medical malpractice liability action without submitting an 
        affidavit described in such subsection if--
                    (A) despite good faith efforts, the individual is 
                unable to obtain the written report before the 
                expiration of the applicable statute of limitations;
                    (B) despite good faith efforts, at the time the 
                individual commences the action, the individual has 
                been unable to obtain medical records or other 
                information necessary, pursuant to any applicable law, 
                to prepare the written report requested; or
                    (C) the court of competent jurisdiction determines 
                that the affidavit requirement shall be extended upon a 
                showing of good cause.
            (2) Deadline for submission where extension applies.--In 
        the case of an individual who brings an action to which 
        paragraph (1) applies, the action shall be dismissed unless the 
        individual submits the affidavit described in subsection (a) 
        not later than--
                    (A) in the case of an action to which subparagraph 
                (A) of paragraph (1) applies, 90 days after commencing 
                the action; or
                    (B) in the case of an action to which subparagraph 
                (B) of paragraph (1) applies, 90 days after obtaining 
                the information described in such subparagraph or when 
                good cause for an extension no longer exists.
    (d) Qualified Specialist Defined.--
            (1) In general.--As used in subsection (a), the term 
        ``qualified specialist'' means, with respect to a medical 
        malpractice liability action, a health care professional who is 
        reasonably believed by the individual bringing the action (or 
        the individual's attorney) to have expertise in the same or 
        substantially similar area of practice to that involved in the 
        action.
            (2) Evidence of expertise.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
        evidence of required expertise may include evidence that the 
        individual--
                    (A) practices (or has practiced) or teaches (or has 
                taught) in the same or substantially similar area of 
                health care or medicine to that involved in the action; 
                or
                    (B) is otherwise qualified by experience or 
                demonstrated competence in the relevant practice area.
    (e) Sanctions for Submitting False Affidavit.--Upon the motion of 
any party or on its own initiative, the court in a medical malpractice 
liability action may impose a sanction on a party, the party's 
attorney, or both, for--
            (1) any knowingly false statement made in an affidavit 
        described in subsection (a);
            (2) making any false representations in order to obtain a 
        qualified specialist's report; or
            (3) failing to have the qualified specialist's written 
        report in his or her custody and control;
and may require that the sanctioned party reimburse the other party to 
the action for costs and reasonable attorney's fees.

SEC. 5404. LIMITATION ON AMOUNT OF ATTORNEY'S CONTINGENCY FEES.

    (a) In General.--An attorney who represents, on a contingency fee 
basis, a plaintiff in a medical malpractice liability action may not 
charge, demand, receive, or collect for services rendered in connection 
with such action (including the resolution of the claim that is the 
subject of the action under any alternative dispute resolution system) 
in excess of--
            (1) 33\1/3\ percent of the first $150,000 of the total 
        amount recovered by judgment or settlement in such action; plus
            (2) 25 percent of any amount recovered above the amount 
        described in paragraph (1);
unless otherwise determined under State law. Such amount shall be 
computed after deductions are made for all the expenses associated with 
the claim other than those attributable to the normal operating 
expenses of the attorney.
    (b) Calculation of Periodic Payments.--In the event that a judgment 
or settlement includes periodic or future payments of damages, the 
amount recovered for purposes of computing the limitation on the 
contingency fee under subsection (a) may, in the discretion of the 
court, be based on the cost of the annuity or trust established to make 
the payments. In any case in which an annuity or trust is not 
established to make such payments, such amount shall be based on the 
present value of the payments.
    (c) Contingency Fee Defined.--As used in this section, the term 
``contingency fee'' means any fee for professional legal services which 
is, in whole or in part, contingent upon the recovery of any amount of 
damages, whether through judgment or settlement.

SEC. 5405. PERIODIC PAYMENT OF AWARDS.

    (a) In General.--A party to a medical malpractice liability action 
may petition the court to instruct the trier of fact to award any 
future damages on an appropriate periodic basis. If the court, in its 
discretion, so instructs the trier of fact, and damages are awarded on 
a periodic basis, the court may require the defendant to purchase an 
annuity or other security instrument (typically based on future damages 
discounted to present value) adequate to assure payments of future 
damages.
    (b) Failure or Inability To Pay.--With respect to an award of 
damages described in subsection (a), if a defendant fails to make 
payments in a timely fashion, or if the defendant becomes or is at risk 
of becoming insolvent, upon such a showing the claimant may petition 
the court for an order requiring that remaining balance be discounted 
to present value and paid to the claimant in a lump-sum.
    (c) Modification of Payment Schedule.--The court shall retain 
authority to modify the payment schedule based on changed 
circumstances.
    (d) Future Damages Defined.--As used in this section, the term 
``future damages'' means any economic or noneconomic loss other than 
that incurred or accrued as of the time of judgment.

SEC. 5406. FEDERAL STUDY ON MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE.

    (a) Study.--To improve the level of empirical data on the incidence 
and effect of medical negligence in the United States, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services shall commission and oversee a nationwide 
interdisciplinary study to evaluate--
            (1) the incidence of injuries resulting from medical 
        treatment, including a determination of the percentage of such 
        injuries that resulted from the negligence of a physician, 
        other health care provider or health care institution;
            (2) the costs of medical expenses and lost wages to the 
        victims of medical negligence and their families, and their 
        compensation for such losses under the current malpractice 
        system;
            (3) methods to reduce the incidence and costs of medical 
        negligence; and
            (4) methods to promote the efficient and fair resolution of 
        legal claims stemming from the incidence of medical negligence.
    (b) Access to Records.--For the purposes of the study conducted 
under subsection (a), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
have the powers necessary to access hospital patients' records while 
maintaining patient confidentiality.
    (c) Report to Congress.--Not later than 3 years after the 
commission of the study under subsection (a), the study shall be 
completed and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prepare 
and submit to Congress a report describing the findings of the study.

PART 2--DEMONSTRATION PROJECT RELATING TO MEDICAL MALPRACTICE LIABILITY

SEC. 5411. PILOT PROGRAM APPLYING PRACTICE GUIDELINES TO MEDICAL 
              MALPRACTICE LIABILITY ACTIONS.

    (a) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services determines that appropriate practice 
guidelines are available and were developed with the input of health 
care providers, legal professionals and consumer representatives, the 
Secretary shall establish pilot programs under which the Secretary 
shall provide funds (in such amounts as the Secretary determines 
appropriate) to one or more eligible States to determine the effect of 
applying practice guidelines in the resolution of medical malpractice 
liability actions.
    (b) Eligibility of State.--To be eligible to participate in a pilot 
program under subsection (a), a State shall prepare and submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require, including--
            (1) assurances that, under the law of the State, in the 
        resolution of any medical malpractice liability action, 
        compliance or noncompliance with an appropriate practice 
        guideline shall be admissible by either party at trial as 
        presumptive evidence-of nonliability or liability for medical 
        negligence; and
            (2) such other information and assurances as the Secretary 
        may require.
    (c) Reports to Congress.--Not later than 3 months after the last 
day of each year for which a pilot program established under subsection 
(a) is in effect, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
prepare and submit to Congress a report describing the operation of the 
program during the year for which the report is submitted. Such report 
shall contain such recommendations as the Secretary considers 
appropriate, include recommendations relating to revisions to the laws 
governing medical practice liability.

SEC. 5412. ENTERPRISE LIABILITY DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.

    (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall establish a demonstration project under which the Secretary shall 
provide funds (in such amount as the Secretary considers appropriate) 
to one or more eligible States to demonstrate whether substituting 
liability for medical malpractice on the part of the health plan in 
which a physician participates for the personal liability of the 
physician will result in improvements in the quality of care provided 
under the plan, reductions in defensive medical practices, and better 
risk management.
    (b) Eligibility of State.--A State is eligible to participate in 
the demonstration project established under subsection (a) if the State 
submits an application to the Secretary (at such time and in such form 
as the Secretary may require) containing such information and 
assurances as the Secretary may require, including assurances that the 
State--
            (1) has entered into an agreement with a health plan (other 
        than a fee-for-service plan) operating in the State under which 
        the plan assumes legal liability with respect to any medical 
        malpractice claim arising from the provision of (or failure to 
        provide) services under the plan by any physician participating 
        in the plan;
            (2) has provided that, under the law of the State, a 
        physician participating in a plan that has entered into an 
        agreement with the State under paragraph (1) may not be liable 
        in damages or otherwise for such a claim and the plan may not 
        require such physician to indemnify the plan for any such 
        liability; and
            (3) will provide the Secretary with such reports on the 
        operation of the project as the Secretary may require.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out demonstration 
projects under this section.

                  Subtitle F--Remedies and Enforcement

   PART 1--REVIEW OF BENEFIT DETERMINATIONS FOR ENROLLED INDIVIDUALS

                        Subpart A--General Rules

SEC. 5501. HEALTH PLAN CLAIMS PROCEDURE.

    (a) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
            (1) Claim.--The term ``claim'' means a claim for payment or 
        provision of benefits under a health plan, a request for 
        preauthorization of items or services which is submitted to a 
        health plan prior to receipt of the items or services, or the 
        denial, reduction or termination of any service or request for 
        a referral or reimbursement.
            (2) Individual claimant.--The term ``individual claimant'' 
        with respect to a claim means any individual who submits the 
        claim to a health plan in connection with the individual's 
        enrollment under the plan, or on whose behalf the claim is 
        submitted to the plan by a provider.
            (3) Provider claimant.--The term ``provider claimant'' with 
        respect to a claim means any provider who submits the claim to 
        a health plan with respect to items or services provided to an 
        individual enrolled under the plan.
    (b) General Rules Governing Treatment of Claims.--
            (1) Adequate notice of disposition of claim.--In any case 
        in which a claim is submitted in complete form to a health 
        plan, the plan shall provide to the individual claimant and any 
        provider claimant with respect to the claim a written notice of 
        the plan's approval or denial of the claim within 15 days after 
        the date of the submission of the claim. The notice to the 
        individual claimant shall be written in language calculated to 
        be understood by the typical individual enrolled under the plan 
        and in a form which takes into account accessibility to the 
        information by individuals whose primary language is not 
        English. In the case of a denial of the claim, the notice shall 
        be provided within 5 days after the date of the determination 
        to deny the claim, and shall set forth the specific reasons for 
        the denial. Such notice shall include an explanation of the 
        specific reasons and facts underlying the decision to reduce or 
        fail to provide services or pay the claim. The notice of a 
        denial shall clearly explain the right to appeal the denial 
        under paragraph (2) and a description of the process for 
        appealing such decision sufficient to allow the claimant to 
        initiate an appeal and submit evidence to the decision maker in 
        support of the position of the claimant. Failure by any plan to 
        comply with the requirements of this paragraph with respect to 
        any claim submitted to the plan shall be treated as approval by 
        the plan of the claim.
            (2) Plan's duty to review denials upon timely request.--The 
        plan shall review its denial of the claim if an individual 
        claimant or provider claimant with respect to the claim submits 
        to the plan a written request for reconsideration of the claim 
        after receipt of written notice from the plan of the denial. 
        The plan shall allow any such claimant not less than 60 days, 
        after receipt of written notice from the plan of the denial, to 
        submit the claimant's request for reconsideration of the claim.
            (3) Time limit for review.--The plan shall complete any 
        review required under paragraph (2), and shall provide the 
        individual claimant and any provider claimant with respect to 
        the claim written notice of the plan's decision on the claim 
        after reconsideration pursuant to the review, within 30 days 
        after the date of the receipt of the request for 
        reconsideration.
            (4) De novo reviews.--Any review required under paragraph 
        (2)--
                    (A) shall be de novo,
                    (B) shall be conducted by an individual who did not 
                make the initial decision denying the claim and who is 
                authorized to approve the claim, and
                    (C) shall include review by a qualified physician 
                in the same speciality as the treating physician if the 
                resolution of any issues involved requires medical 
                expertise.
    (c) Treatment of Urgent Requests to Plans for Preauthorization.--
            (1) In general.--This subsection applies in the case of any 
        claim submitted by an individual claimant or a provider 
        claimant consisting of a request for preauthorization of items 
        or services which is accompanied by an attestation that--
                    (A) failure to immediately provide the items or 
                services could reasonably be expected to result in--
                            (i) placing the health of the individual 
                        claimant (or, with respect to an individual 
                        claimant who is a pregnant woman, the health of 
                        the woman or her unborn child) in serious 
                        jeopardy,
                            (ii) serious impairment to bodily 
                        functions, or
                            (iii) serious dysfunction of any bodily 
                        organ or part,
                or
                    (B) immediate provision of the items or services is 
                necessary because the individual claimant has made or 
                is at serious risk of making an attempt to harm such 
                individual claimant or another individual.
            (2) Shortened time limit for consideration of requests for 
        preauthorization.--Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), a health 
        plan shall approve or deny any claim described in paragraph (1) 
        within 12 hours after submission of the claim to the plan. 
        Failure by the plan to comply with the requirements of this 
        paragraph with respect to the claim shall be treated as 
        approval by the plan of the claim.
            (3) Expedited exhaustion of plan remedies.--Any claim 
        described in paragraph (1) which is denied by the plan shall be 
        treated as a claim with respect to which all remedies under the 
        plan provided pursuant to this section are exhausted, 
        irrespective of any review provided under subsection (b)(2).
            (4) Denial of previously authorized claims not permitted.--
        In any case in which a health plan approves a claim described 
        in paragraph (1)--
                    (A) the plan may not subsequently deny payment or 
                provision of benefits pursuant to the claim, unless the 
                plan makes a showing of an intentional 
                misrepresentation of a material fact by the individual 
                claimant, and
                    (B) in the case of a violation of subparagraph (A) 
                in connection with the claim, all remedies under the 
                plan provided pursuant to this section with respect to 
                the claim shall be treated as exhausted.
    (d) Time Limit for Determination of Incompleteness of Claim.--For 
purposes of this section--
            (1) any claim submitted by an individual claimant and 
        accepted by a provider serving under contract with a health 
        plan and any claim described in subsection (b)(1) shall be 
        treated with respect to the individual claimant as submitted in 
        complete form, and
            (2) any other claim for benefits under the plan shall be 
        treated as filed in complete form as of 10 days after the date 
        of the submission of the claim, unless the plan provides to the 
        individual claimant and any provider claimant, within such 
        period, a written notice of any required matter remaining to be 
        filed in order to complete the claim.
Any filing by the individual claimant or the provider claimant of 
additional matter requested by the plan pursuant to paragraph (2) shall 
be treated for purposes of this section as an initial filing of the 
claim.
    (e) Additional Notice and Disclosure Requirements for Health 
Plans.--In the case of a denial of a claim for benefits under a health 
plan, the plan shall include, together with the specific reasons 
provided to the individual claimant and any provider claimant under 
subsection (b)(1)--
            (1) if the denial is based in whole or in part on a 
        determination that the claim is for an item or service which is 
        not covered by the comprehensive benefit package or exceeds 
        payment rates under the applicable fee schedule, the factual 
        basis for the determination,
            (2) if the denial is based in whole or in part on exclusion 
        of coverage with respect to services because the services are 
        determined to comprise an experimental treatment or 
        investigatory procedure, the medical basis for the 
        determination and a description of the process used in making 
        the determination, and
            (3) if the denial is based in whole or in part on a 
        determination that the treatment is not medically necessary or 
        appropriate or is inconsistent with the plan's practice 
        guidelines, the medical basis for the determination, the 
        guidelines used in making the determination, and a description 
        of the process used in making the determination.
    (f) Waiver of Rights Prohibited.--A health plan may not require any 
party to waive any right under the plan or this Act as a condition for 
approval of any claim under the plan, except to the extent otherwise 
specified in a formal settlement agreement.

SEC. 5502. REVIEW IN AREA COMPLAINT REVIEW OFFICES OF GRIEVANCES BASED 
              ON ACTS OR PRACTICES BY HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) Complaint Review Offices.--
            (1) In general.--In accordance with rules which shall be 
        prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, each State shall 
        establish and maintain a complaint review office for each 
        community rating area established by such State. According to 
        designations which shall be made by each State under 
        regulations of the Secretary of Labor, the complaint review 
        office for a community rating area established by such State 
        shall also serve as the complaint review office for large group 
        sponsors operating in the State with respect to individuals who 
        are enrolled under health plans maintained by such sponsors and 
        who reside within the area of the community rating area.
            (2) Health systems not established by States.--In the case 
        of any health care system established in any State by the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services shall assume all duties and obligations of 
        such State under this part in accordance with the applicable 
        regulations of the Secretary of Labor under this part.
    (b) Filings of Complaints by Aggrieved Persons.--In the case of any 
person who is aggrieved by--
            (1) any act or practice engaged in by any health plan which 
        consists of or results in denial of payment or provision of 
        benefits under the plan or delay in the payment or provision of 
        benefits, or
            (2) any act or practice engaged in by any other plan 
        maintained in a community rating area or by a large group 
        sponsor which consists of or results in denial of payment or 
        provision of benefits under a supplemental benefit policy or a 
        cost sharing policy or delay in the payment or provision of the 
        benefits,
if the claimant alleges that the denial or delay consists of a failure 
to comply with the terms of the plan (including the provision of 
benefits in full when due in accordance with the terms of the plan), or 
with the applicable requirements of this Act, such person may file a 
complaint with the appropriate complaint review office.
    (c) Exhaustion of Plan Remedies.--Any complaint including a claim 
to which section 5501 applies may not be filed until the complainant 
has exhausted all remedies provided under the plan with respect to the 
claim in accordance with such section.
    (d) Form of Complaint.--The complaint shall be in writing under 
oath or affirmation, shall set forth the complaint in a manner 
calculated to give notice of the nature of the complaint, and shall 
contain such information as may be prescribed in regulations of the 
Secretary of Labor.
    (e) Notice of Filing.--The complaint review office shall serve by 
certified mail a notice of the complaint (including the date, place, 
and circumstances of the alleged violation) on the person or persons 
alleged in the complaint to have committed the violation within 10 days 
after the filing of the complaint.
    (f) Time Limitation.--Complaints may not be brought under this 
section with respect to any violation later than one year after the 
date on which the complaining party knows or should have reasonably 
known that a violation has occurred. This subsection shall not prevent 
the subsequent amending of a complaint.

SEC. 5503. INITIAL PROCEEDINGS IN COMPLAINT REVIEW OFFICES.

    (a) Elections.--Whenever a complaint is brought to the complaint 
review office under section 5502(b), the complaint review office shall 
provide the complainant with an opportunity, in such form and manner as 
shall be prescribed in regulations of the Secretary of Labor, to elect 
one of the following:
            (1) To forego further proceedings in the complaint review 
        office and rely on remedies available in a court of competent 
        jurisdiction.
            (2) To submit the complaint as a dispute under the Early 
        Resolution Program established under subpart B and thereby 
        suspend further review proceedings under this section pending 
        termination of proceedings under the Program.
            (3) In any case in which an election under paragraph (1) or 
        (2) is not made, or an election under paragraph (2) was made 
        but resolution of all matters in the complaint was not obtained 
        upon termination of proceedings pursuant to the election by 
        settlement agreement or otherwise, to proceed with the 
        complaint to a hearing in the complaint review office under 
        section 5504 regarding the unresolved matters.
    (b) Duty of Complaint Review Office.--The complaint review office 
shall provide (in a linguistically appropriate manner) an explanation 
to complainants bringing complaints to the office concerning the legal 
and other ramifications of each option available under this section.
    (c) Effect of Participation in Early Resolution Program.--Any 
matter in a complaint brought to the complaint review office which is 
included in a dispute which is timely submitted to the Early Resolution 
Program established under subpart B shall not be assigned to a hearing 
under section 5504 unless the proceedings under the Program with 
respect to the dispute are terminated without settlement or resolution 
of the dispute with respect to such matter. Upon termination of any 
proceedings regarding a dispute submitted to the Program, the 
applicability of this section to any matter in a complaint which was 
included in the dispute shall not be affected by participation in the 
proceedings, except to the extent otherwise required under the terms of 
any settlement agreement or other formal resolution obtained in the 
proceedings.

SEC. 5504. HEARINGS BEFORE HEARING OFFICERS IN COMPLAINT REVIEW 
              OFFICES.

    (a) Hearing Process.--
            (1) Assignment of complaints to hearing officers and notice 
        to parties.--
                    (A) In general.--In the case of an election under 
                section 5503(a)(3)--
                            (i) the complaint review office shall 
                        assign the complaint, and each motion in 
                        connection with the complaint, to a hearing 
                        officer employed by the State in the office; 
                        and
                            (ii) the hearing officer shall have the 
                        power to issue and cause to be served upon the 
                        plan named in the complaint a copy of the 
                        complaint and a notice of hearing before the 
                        hearing officer at a place fixed in the notice, 
                        not less than 5 days after the serving of the 
                        complaint.
                    (B) Qualifications for hearing officers.--No 
                individual may serve in a complaint review office as a 
                hearing officer unless the individual meets standards 
                which shall be prescribed by the Secretary of Labor. 
                Such standards shall include experience, training, 
                ability to communicate with the enrollee, affiliations, 
                diligence, absence of actual or potential conflicts of 
                interest, and other qualifications deemed relevant by 
                the Secretary of Labor. At no time shall a hearing 
                officer have any official, financial, or personal 
                conflict of interest with respect to issues in 
                controversy before the hearing officer.
            (2) Amendment of complaints.--Any such complaint may be 
        amended by the hearing officer conducting the hearing, upon the 
        motion of the complainant, in the hearing officer's discretion 
        at any time prior to the issuance of an order based thereon.
            (3) Answers.--The party against whom the complaint is filed 
        shall have the right to file an answer to the original or 
        amended complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give 
        testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
    (b) Additional Parties.--In the discretion of the hearing officer 
conducting the hearing, any other person may be allowed to intervene in 
the proceeding and to present testimony.
    (c) Hearings.--
            (1) De novo hearing.--Each hearing officer shall hear 
        complaints and motions de novo.
            (2) Testimony.--The testimony taken by the hearing officer 
        shall be reduced to writing. Thereafter, the hearing officer, 
        in his or her discretion, upon notice may provide for the 
        taking of further testimony or hear argument.
            (3) Authority of hearing officers.--The hearing officer may 
        compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses and the 
        production of evidence at any designated place or hearing. In 
        case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued 
        under this paragraph and upon application of the hearing 
        officer, an appropriate district court of the United States may 
        issue an order requiring compliance with the subpoena and any 
        failure to obey the order may be punished by the court as a 
        contempt thereof. The hearing officer may also seek enforcement 
        of the subpoena in a State court of competent jurisdiction.
            (4) Expedited hearings.--Notwithstanding section 5503 and 
        the preceding provisions of this section, upon receipt of a 
        complaint containing a claim described in section 5501(c)(1), 
        the complaint review office shall promptly provide the 
        complainant with the opportunity to make an election under 
        section 5503(a)(3) and assignment to a hearing on the complaint 
        before a hearing officer. The complaint review office shall 
        ensure that such a hearing commences not later than 24 hours 
        after receipt of the complaint by the complaint hearing office 
        and not later than 3 days after the receipt of a complaint, the 
        Complaint Review Office shall provide a decision.
    (d) Decision of Hearing Officer.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date on 
        which a complaint is assigned under this section, the hearing 
        officer shall decide if the preponderance of the evidence 
        justifies the denial of services and whether to decide in favor 
        of the complainant with respect to each alleged act or 
        practice. Each such decision--
                    (A) shall include the hearing officer's findings of 
                fact, and
                    (B) shall constitute the hearing officer's final 
                disposition of the proceedings.
            (2) Decisions finding in favor of complainant.--If the 
        hearing officer's decision includes a determination that any 
        party named in the complaint has engaged in or is engaged in an 
        act or practice described in section 5502(b), the hearing 
        officer shall issue and cause to be served on such party an 
        order which requires such party--
                    (A) to cease and desist from such act or practice,
                    (B) to provide the benefits due under the terms of 
                the plan and to otherwise comply with the terms of the 
                plan and the applicable requirements of this Act,
                    (C) to pay to the complainant prejudgment interest 
                on the actual costs incurred in obtaining the items and 
                services at issue in the complaint,
                    (D) to pay to the prevailing complainant a 
                reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert witness 
                fees, and other reasonable costs relating to the 
                hearing on the charges on which the complainant 
                prevails, and
                    (E) to provide other appropriate relief.
            (3) Decisions not in favor of complainant.--If the hearing 
        officer's decision includes a determination that the party 
        named in the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaged in 
        an act or practice referred to in section 5502(b), the hearing 
        officer--
                    (A) shall include in the decision a dismissal of 
                the charge in the complaint relating to the act or 
                practice, and
                    (B) upon a finding that such charge is frivolous, 
                shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant 
                an order which requires the complainant to pay to such 
                party a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert 
                witness fees, and other reasonable costs relating to 
                the proceedings on such charge.
            (4) Submission and service of decisions.--The hearing 
        officer shall submit each decision to the complaint review 
        office at the conclusion of the proceedings and the office 
        shall cause a copy of the decision to be served on the parties 
        to the proceedings.
    (e) Final Decision.--The decision of the hearing officer shall be 
final and binding upon all parties.
    (f) Court Enforcement of Orders.--
            (1) In general.--The complainant may petition any court of 
        competent jurisdiction for enforcement of the order. In any 
        such proceeding, the order of the hearing officer shall not be 
        subject to review.
            (2) Awarding of costs.--In any action for court enforcement 
        under this subsection, a prevailing complainant shall be 
        entitled to a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert 
        witness fees, and other reasonable costs relating to such 
        action.

SEC. 5505. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.

    (a) Denial or Delay in Payment or Provision of Benefits.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor may assess a civil 
        penalty against any health plan, or against any other plan in 
        connection with benefits provided thereunder under a 
        supplemental benefit policy or a cost sharing policy, for 
        unreasonable denial or delay in the payment or provision of 
        benefits thereunder, in an amount not to exceed--
                    (A) $25,000 per violation, or $75,000 per violation 
                in the case of a finding of bad faith on the part of 
                the plan, and
                    (B) in the case of a finding of a pattern or 
                practice of such violations engaged in by the plan, 
                $1,000,000 in addition to the total amount of penalties 
                assessed under subparagraph (A) with respect to such 
                violations.
        For purposes of subparagraph (A), each violation with respect 
        to any single individual shall be treated as a separate 
        violation.
            (2) Civil action to enforce civil penalty.--The Secretary 
        of Labor may commence a civil action in any court of competent 
        jurisdiction to enforce a civil penalty assessed under 
        paragraph (1).
            (3) Supplemental plans.--Nothing in this section shall be 
        construed to limit the rights and remedies available under 
        State law with respect to supplemental benefit plans.
    (b) Civil Penalties for Certain Other Actions.--The Secretary of 
Labor may assess a civil penalty described in section 5505(b)(1) 
against any experience-rated health plan, or against any other plan 
sponsored by a large employer group purchaser in connection with 
benefits provided thereunder under a cost sharing policy, for any 
action described in section 5505(a). The Secretary of Labor may 
initiate proceedings to impose such penalty in the same manner as the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services may initiate proceedings under 
section 5505 with respect to actions described in section 5505(a).

                  Subpart B--Early Resolution Programs

SEC. 5511. ESTABLISHMENT OF EARLY RESOLUTION PROGRAMS IN COMPLAINT 
              REVIEW OFFICES.

    (a) Establishment of Programs.--Each State shall establish and 
maintain an Early Resolution Program in each complaint review office in 
such State. The Program shall include--
            (1) the establishment and maintenance of forums for 
        mediation of disputes in accordance with this subpart, and
            (2) the establishment and maintenance of such forums for 
        other forms of alternative dispute resolution (including 
        binding arbitration) as may be prescribed in regulations of the 
        Secretary of Labor.
Each State shall ensure that the standards applied in Early Resolution 
Programs administered in such State which apply to any form of 
alternative dispute resolution described in paragraph (2) and which 
relate to time requirements, qualifications of facilitators, 
arbitrators, or other mediators, and confidentiality are at least 
equivalent to the standards which apply to mediation proceedings under 
this subpart.
    (b) Duties of Complaint Review Offices.--Each complaint review 
office in a State--
            (1) shall administer its Early Resolution Program in 
        accordance with regulations of the Secretary of Labor,
            (2) shall, pursuant to subsection (a)(1)--
                    (A) recruit and train individuals to serve as 
                facilitators for mediation proceedings under the Early 
                Resolution Program from attorneys who have the 
                requisite expertise for such service, which shall be 
                specified in regulations of the Secretary of Labor,
                    (B) provide meeting sites, maintain records, and 
                provide facilitators with administrative support staff, 
                and
                    (C) establish and maintain attorney referral 
                panels,
            (3) shall ensure that, upon the filing of a complaint with 
        the office, the complainant is adequately apprised of the 
        complainant's options for review under this part, and
            (4) shall monitor and evaluate the Program on an ongoing 
        basis.

SEC. 5512. INITIATION OF PARTICIPATION IN MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

    (a) Eligibility of Cases for Submission to Early Resolution 
Program.--A dispute may be submitted to the Early Resolution Program 
only if the following requirements are met with respect to the dispute:
            (1) Nature of dispute.--The dispute consists of--
                    (A) an assertion by an individual enrolled under a 
                health plan of one or more claims against the health 
                plan for payment or provision of benefits, or against 
                any other health plan with respect to benefits provided 
                under a supplemental benefit policy or a cost sharing 
                policy, based on alleged coverage under the plan; and
                    (B) a denial by the plan of the claims, or a denial 
                of appropriate reimbursement based on the claims, by 
                the plan.
            (2) Nature of disputed claim.--Each claim consists of--
                    (A) a claim for payment or provision of benefits 
                under the plan; or
                    (B) a request for information or documents the 
                disclosure of which is required under this Act 
                (including claims of entitlement to disclosure based on 
                colorable claims to rights to benefits under the plan).
    (b) Filing of Election.--A complainant with a dispute which is 
eligible for submission to the Early Resolution Program may make the 
election under section 5503(a)(2) to submit the dispute to mediation 
proceedings under the Program not later than 15 days after the date the 
complaint is filed with the complaint review office under section 
5502(b).
    (c) Agreement To Participate.--
            (1) Election by claimant.--A complainant may elect 
        participation in the mediation proceedings only by entering 
        into a written participation agreement (including an agreement 
        to comply with the rules of the Program and consent for the 
        complaint review office to contact the health plan regarding 
        the agreement), and by releasing plan records to the Program 
        for the exclusive use of the facilitator assigned to the 
        dispute.
            (2) Participation by plans or health benefits 
        contractors.--Each party whose participation in the mediation 
        proceedings has been elected by a claimant pursuant to 
        paragraph (1) shall participate in, and cooperate fully with, 
        the proceedings. The claims review office shall provide such 
        party with a copy of the participation agreement described in 
        paragraph (1), together with a written description of the 
        Program. Such party shall submit the copy of the agreement, 
        together with its authorized signature signifying receipt of 
        notice of the agreement, to the claims review office, and shall 
        include in the submission to the claims review office a copy of 
        the written record of the plan claims procedure completed 
        pursuant to section 5501 with respect to the dispute and all 
        relevant plan documents. The relevant documents shall include 
        all documents under which the plan is or was administered or 
        operated, including copies of any insurance contracts under 
        which benefits are or were provided and any fee or 
        reimbursement schedules for health care providers.

SEC. 5513. MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

    (a) Role of Facilitator.--In the course of mediation proceedings 
under the Early Resolution Program, the facilitator assigned to the 
dispute shall prepare the parties for a conference regarding the 
dispute and serve as a neutral mediator at such conference, with the 
goal of achieving settlement of the dispute.
    (b) Preparations for Conference.--In advance of convening the 
conference, after identifying the necessary parties and confirming that 
the case is eligible for the Program, the facilitator shall analyze the 
record of the claims procedure conducted pursuant to section 5501 and 
any position papers submitted by the parties to determine if further 
case development is needed to clarify the legal and factual issues in 
dispute, and whether there is any need for additional information and 
documents.
    (c) Conference.--Upon convening the conference, the facilitator 
shall assist the parties in identifying undisputed issues and exploring 
settlement. If settlement is reached, the facilitator shall assist in 
the preparation of a written settlement agreement. If no settlement is 
reached, the facilitator shall present the facilitator's evaluation, 
including an assessment of the parties' positions, the likely outcome 
of further administrative action or litigation, and suggestions for 
narrowing the issues in dispute.
    (d) Time Limit.--The facilitator shall ensure that mediation 
proceedings with respect to any dispute under the Early Resolution 
Program shall be completed within 120 days after the election to 
participate. The parties may agree to one extension of the proceedings 
by not more than 30 days if the proceedings are suspended to obtain an 
agency ruling or to reconvene the conference in a subsequent session.
    (e) Inapplicability of Formal Rules.--Formal rules of evidence 
shall not apply to mediation proceedings under the Early Resolution 
Program. All statements made and evidence presented in the proceedings 
shall be admissible in the proceedings. The facilitator shall be the 
sole judge of the proper weight to be afforded to each submission. The 
parties to mediation proceedings under the Program shall not be 
required to make statements or present evidence under oath.
    (f) Representation.--Parties may participate pro se or be 
represented by attorneys throughout the proceedings of the Early 
Resolution Program.
    (g) Confidentiality.--
            (1) In general.--Under regulations of the Secretary of 
        Labor, rules similar to the rules under section 574 of title 5, 
        United States Code (relating to confidentiality in dispute 
        resolution proceedings) shall apply to the mediation 
        proceedings under the Early Resolution Program.
            (2) Civil remedies.--The Secretary of Labor may assess a 
        civil penalty against any person who discloses information in 
        violation of the regulations prescribed pursuant to paragraph 
        (1) in the amount of three times the amount of the claim 
        involved. The Secretary of Labor may bring a civil action to 
        enforce such civil penalty in any court of competent 
        jurisdiction.

SEC. 5514. LEGAL EFFECT OF PARTICIPATION IN MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

    (a) Process Nonbinding.--Findings and conclusions made in the 
mediation proceedings of the Early Resolution Program shall be treated 
as advisory in nature and nonbinding. Except as provided in subsection 
(b), the rights of the parties under subpart A shall not be affected by 
participation in the Program.
    (b) Resolution Through Settlement Agreement.--If a case is settled 
through participation in mediation proceedings under the Program, the 
facilitator shall assist the parties in drawing up an agreement which 
shall constitute, upon signature of the parties, a binding contract 
between the parties, which shall be enforceable under section 5515.
    (c) Preservation of Rights of Non-Parties.--The settlement 
agreement shall not have the effect of waiving or otherwise affecting 
any rights to review under subpart A, or any other right under this Act 
or the plan, with respect to any person who is not a party to the 
settlement agreement.

SEC. 5515. ENFORCEMENT OF SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS.

    (a) Enforcement.--Any party to a settlement agreement entered 
pursuant to mediation proceedings under this subpart may petition any 
court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of the agreement, 
by filing in the court a written petition praying that the agreement be 
enforced. In such a proceeding, the order of the hearing officer shall 
not be subject to review.
    (b) Court Review.--It shall be the duty of the court to advance on 
the docket and to expedite to the greatest possible extent the 
disposition of any petition filed under this section, with due 
deference to the role of settlement agreements under this part in 
achieving prompt resolution of disputes involving health plans.
    (c) Awarding of Attorney's Fees and Other Costs and Expenses.--In 
any action by an individual enrolled under a health plan for court 
enforcement under this section, a prevailing plaintiff shall be 
entitled to reasonable costs and expenses (including a reasonable 
attorney's fee and reasonable expert witness fees) on the charges on 
which the plaintiff prevails.

SEC. 5516. DUE PROCESS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    (a) Publicly Available Standards and Process.--Each health plan 
shall establish and utilize--
            (1) publicly available standards for contracting with 
        health care providers; and
            (2) a publicly available process for dismissing such 
        providers or failing to renew contracts with such providers.
    (b) Notice Requirement.--
            (1) In general.--The process established by a health plan 
        under subsection (a) shall include reasonable notification to a 
        health care provider of a decision to dismiss such provider or 
        not to renew a contract with such provider before such decision 
        takes effect.
            (2) Exception.--The notice required under paragraph (1) 
        shall not apply if failure to dismiss a provider or renewing a 
        provider's contract would adversely affect the health or safety 
        of a patient.
            (3) Contents of notice.--Each notice to a health care 
        provider under paragraph (1) shall contain the reasons for the 
        dismissal or failure to renew. Such reasons shall be consistent 
        with the standards established under subsection (a).
    (c) Review.--The process established by a health plan under 
subsection (a) shall include an opportunity for review of the health 
plan's action by a health care provider who is dismissed by a health 
plan or with respect to whom a health plan fails to renew a contract. 
Such review shall be conducted by--
            (1) the provider's peers who have contracts with, or are 
        employed by, the health plan; and
            (2) if there is mutual consent of the provider and the 
        health plan, one or more enrollees in the health plan.
A health care provider may have an attorney present in connection with 
any review under this subsection if the provider notifies the health 
plan that an attorney will be present in advance of the review 
proceeding.
    (d) Effect on Other Laws.--The provisions of this section shall not 
supersede any other provision of Federal or State law.

         PART 2--ADDITIONAL REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS

SEC. 5531. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FEDERAL ACTION ON STATE SYSTEMS.

    (a) In General.--Any State that is aggrieved by a determination by 
the Secretary under subpart B of part 1 of subtitle E of title I shall 
be entitled to judicial review of such determination in accordance with 
this section.
    (b) Judicial Review.--
            (1) Jurisdiction.--The courts of appeals of the United 
        States (other than the United States Court of Appeals for the 
        Federal Circuit) shall have jurisdiction to review a 
        determination described in subsection (a), to affirm the 
        determination, or to set it aside, in whole or in part. A 
        judgment of a court of appeals in such an action shall be 
        subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States 
        upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of 
        title 28, United States Code.
            (2) Petition for review.--A State that desires judicial 
        review of a determination described in subsection (a) shall, 
        within 30 days after it has been notified of such 
        determination, file with the United States court of appeals for 
        the circuit in which the State is located a petition for review 
        of such determination. A copy of the petition shall be 
        transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary, and the 
        Secretary shall file in the court the record of the proceedings 
        on which the determination or action was based, as provided in 
        section 2112 of title 28, United States Code.
            (3) Scope of review.--The findings of fact of the 
        Secretary, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be 
        conclusive; but the court, for good cause shown, may remand the 
        case to the Secretary to take further evidence, and the 
        Secretary may make new or modified findings of fact and may 
        modify its previous action, and shall certify to the court the 
        record of the further proceedings. Such new or modified 
        findings of fact shall likewise be conclusive if supported by 
        substantial evidence.

SEC. 5532. CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.

    Unless otherwise provided in this Act, the district courts of the 
United States shall have jurisdiction of civil actions brought by--
            (1) the Secretary of Labor to enforce any final order of 
        such Secretary or to collect any civil monetary penalty 
        assessed by such Secretary under this Act; and
            (2) the Secretary of Health and Human Services to enforce 
        any final order of such Secretary or to collect any civil 
        monetary penalty assessed by such Secretary under this Act.

SEC. 5533. PRIORITY OF CERTAIN BANKRUPTCY CLAIMS.

    Section 507(a)(8) of title 11, United States Code, is amended to 
read as follows:
            ``(8) Eighth, allowed unsecured claims--
                    ``(A) based upon any commitment by the debtor to 
                the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the 
                Resolution Trust Corporation, the Director of the 
                Office of Thrift Supervision, the Comptroller of the 
                Currency, or the Board of Governors of the Federal 
                Reserve System, or their predecessors or successors, to 
                maintain the capital of an insured depository 
                institution; or
                    ``(B) for payments under title X of the Health 
                Security Act owed to a State.''.

SEC. 5534. PRIVATE RIGHT TO ENFORCE STATE RESPONSIBILITIES.

    The failure of a participating State to carry out a responsibility 
applicable to participating States under this Act constitutes a 
deprivation of rights secured by this Act for the purposes of section 
1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1983). In 
an action brought under such section, the court shall exercise 
jurisdiction without regard to whether the aggrieved person has 
exhausted any administrative or other remedies that may be provided by 
law.

SEC. 5535. PRIVATE RIGHT TO ENFORCE FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITIES IN 
              OPERATING A SYSTEM IN A STATE.

    (a) In General.--The failure of the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services to carry out a responsibility under subpart C of part 1 of 
subtitle E of title I, confers an enforceable right of action on any 
person who is aggrieved by such failure. Such a person may commence a 
civil action against the Secretary in an appropriate State court or 
district court of the United States.
    (b) Exhaustion of Remedies.--In an action under subsection (a), the 
court shall exercise jurisdiction without regard to whether the 
aggrieved person has exhausted any administrative or other remedies 
that may be provided by law.
    (c) Relief.--In an action under subsection (a), if the court finds 
that a failure described in such subsection has occurred, the aggrieved 
person may recover compensatory damages and the court may award any 
other appropriate relief.
    (d) Attorney's Fees.--In an action under subsection (a), the court, 
in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the 
United States, a reasonable attorney's fee (including expert fees) as 
part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs the 
same as a private person.

SEC. 5536. ENFORCEMENT OF CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.

    (a) Covered Violations.--The provisions of this section shall apply 
with respect to a health plan that fails to fulfill a duty imposed on 
the plan under section 1122 and subtitle A of this title.
    (b) Administrative Enforcement and Civil Penalties.--The penalties 
described in section 1867(d)(1) of the Social Security Act and the 
procedures described in section 1128A of such Act (other than the first 
two sentences of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall apply to 
health plans described in subsection (a). In addition to such 
penalties, an amount not to exceed $1,000,000 may be assessed in the 
case of a finding of a pattern or practice of such violations. The 
Secretary shall establish procedures whereby, when a consumer has 
disenrolled from a health plan violating the duties described in 
subsection (a), successor health plans may recover from the original 
health plan for health care costs attributable to such violations.
    (c) Correction of Substantial Violations.--Upon an administrative 
or judicial finding of a substantial violation of the duties described 
in subsection (a), the State or court may--
            (1) inform all current enrollees of the plan of the 
        violation and that they may disenroll immediately from that 
        plan and enroll with another community-rated health plan; and
            (2) notify the health plan that it shall immediately cease 
        enrollment activities until it has obtained certifications from 
        the appropriate certifying entity or court that the violation 
        has been corrected.
Such actions shall not be taken without providing the health plan with 
a reasonable opportunity to correct such violations, except where 
providing such an opportunity would risk health or safety.

SEC. 5537. DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS.

    (a) Civil Action by Aggrieved Person.--
            (1)  In general.--Any person who is aggrieved by a 
        violation of section 1602 may commence a civil action against 
        the party or parties committing such violation in an 
        appropriate State court or district court of the United States.
            (2) Standards.--The standards used to determine whether a 
        violation has occurred in a complaint alleging discrimination 
        on the basis of age or disability under section 1602 shall be 
        the standards applied under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
        (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities 
        Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.).
            (3) Relief.--In any action under paragraph (1), if the 
        court finds a violation of section 1602, the court may award 
        such equitable and injunctive relief as it deems appropriate, 
        and may award to the aggrieved person any sums lost as a result 
        of the violation. If the court finds that the party or parties 
        committing a violation engaged in intentional discrimination in 
        violation of section 1602, the aggrieved person may recover 
        compensatory damages. If the court finds that the party or 
        parties committing such violation did so with malice or 
        reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of the 
        aggrieved person, the aggrieved person may recover punitive 
        damages under this section against a defendant other than a 
        government, government agency or political subdivision.
            (4) Attorneys' fees.--In any action under paragraph (1), 
        the court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, 
        other than the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee 
        (including expert fees and other litigation expenses) as part 
        of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs 
        the same as a private person.
    (b) Action by Secretary.--Whenever the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services finds that a party has failed to comply with section 
1602 or with an applicable regulation issued under such section, the 
Secretary shall notify the party. If within a reasonable period of time 
the party fails or refuses to comply, the Secretary may--
            (1) refer the matter to the Attorney General with a 
        recommendation that an appropriate civil action be instituted;
            (2) terminate or limit the participation of such party in 
        the programs authorized by this Act;
            (3) withhold Federal financial assistance to the party; or
            (4) take such other action as may be provided by law.
    (c) Action by Attorney General.--When a matter is referred to the 
Attorney General under subsection (b)(1), the Attorney General may 
bring a civil action in a district court of the United States for such 
relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief. In a civil 
action under this section, the court--
            (1) may grant any equitable relief that the court considers 
        to be appropriate;
            (2) may award such other relief as the court considers to 
        be appropriate, including in cases of intentional 
        discrimination compensatory and punitive damages; and
            (3) may, to vindicate the public interest when requested by 
        the Attorney General, assess a civil money penalty against the 
        party in an amount--
                    (A) not exceeding $50,000 for a first violation; 
                and
                    (B) not exceeding $100,000 for any subsequent 
                violation.

SEC. 5538. NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS.

    Federal payments under this Act shall be treated as Federal 
financial assistance for purposes of section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), section 303 of the Age Discrimination Act 
of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6102), and section 601 of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d).

SEC. 5539. CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATION ACTION BY ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY 
              PROVIDER.

    (a) In General.--An electing essential community provider (as 
defined in section 1466(d)) who is aggrieved by the failure of a health 
plan to fulfill a duty imposed on the plan by section 1466 may commence 
a civil action against the plan in an appropriate State court or 
district court of the United States.
    (b) Relief.--In an action under subsection (a), if the court finds 
that the health plan has failed to fulfill a duty imposed on the plan 
by section 1466, the electing essential community provider may recover 
compensatory damages and the court may order any other appropriate 
relief.
    (c) Attorney's Fees.--In any action under subsection (a), the 
court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than 
the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee (including expert fees) 
as part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs 
the same as a private person.
    (d) State Complaint System Required.--Prior to commencing an action 
under subsection (a), the aggrieved essential community provider may 
first elect to utilize the administrative process provided under this 
subsection as follows:
            (1) The Secretary shall prescribe regulations governing 
        administrative grievance actions by essential community 
        providers that shall be consistent with the requirements of 
        section 5504 and that shall provide for the consolidation of 
        complaints (at the election of the essential community 
        providers) in cases involving multiple complaints against a 
        single health plan.
            (2) A State shall make available to each electing essential 
        community provider that is aggrieved by an action of a health 
        plan under section 1466, the opportunity to file a complaint in 
        the complaint review office established under section 5502. In 
        the case of essential community providers located in a 
        cooperative established in any State by the Secretary, the 
        Secretary shall assume all of the duties and obligations of 
        such State under this section.

SEC. 5540. FACIAL CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES.

    (a) Jurisdiction.--The United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction of 
any civil action brought to invalidate this Act or a provision of this 
Act on the ground of its being repugnant to the Constitution of the 
United States on its face and for every purpose. In any action 
described in this subsection, the district court may not grant any 
temporary order or preliminary injunction restraining the enforcement, 
operation, or execution of this Act or any provision of this Act.
    (b) Convening of Three-Judge Court.--An action described in 
subsection (a) shall be heard and determined by a district court of 
three judges in accordance with section 2284 of title 28, United States 
Code.
    (c) Consolidation.--When actions described in subsection (a) 
involving a common question of law or fact are pending before a 
district court, the court shall order all the actions consolidated.
    (d) Direct Appeal to Supreme Court.--In any action described in 
subsection (a), an appeal may be taken directly to the Supreme Court of 
the United States from any final judgment, decree, or order in which 
the district court--
            (1) holds this Act or any provision of this Act invalid; 
        and
            (2) makes a determination that its holding will materially 
        undermine the application of the Act as whole.
    (e) Construction.--This section does not limit--
            (1) the right of any person--
                    (A) to a litigation concerning the Act or any 
                portion of the Act; or
                    (B) to petition the Supreme Court for review of any 
                holding of a district court by writ of certiorari at 
                any time before the rendition of judgment in a court of 
                appeals; or
            (2) the authority of the Supreme Court to grant a writ of 
        certiorari for the review described in paragraph (1)(B).

SEC. 5541. TREATMENT OF PLANS AS PARTIES IN CIVIL ACTIONS.

    (a) In General.--A health plan may sue or be sued under this Act as 
an entity. Service of summons, subpoena, or other legal process of a 
court or hearing officer upon a trustee or an administrator of any such 
plan in his or her capacity as such shall constitute service upon the 
plan. In a case where a plan has not designated in applicable plan 
documents an individual as agent for the service of legal process, 
service upon the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in the case of 
a community-rated health plan) or the Secretary of Labor (in the case 
of an experienced-rated health plan) shall constitute such service. The 
Secretary, not later than 15 days after receipt of service under the 
preceding sentence, shall notify the administrator or any trustee of 
the plan of receipt of such service.
    (b) Other Parties.--Any money judgment under this Act against a 
plan referred to in subsection (a) shall be enforceable only against 
the plan as an entity and shall not be enforceable against any other 
person unless liability against such person is established in his 
individual capacity under this Act.

SEC. 5542. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

    (a) In General.--A health plan may not discharge, discriminate or 
otherwise take adverse action against any employee with respect to 
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because the 
employee (or any person acting pursuant to the request of the employee) 
provided information to any Federal, State or private supervisory 
agency or entity regarding a possible violation of any provision of 
this Act or any regulation issued under this Act.
    (b) Civil Action.--An employee or former employee who believes that 
such employee has been discharged, discriminated or otherwise subject 
to adverse action in violation of subsection (a) may file a civil 
action in the appropriate United States district court within 2 years 
of the date of such discharge, discrimination or adverse action.
    (c) Determination of Court.--If a court in an action under 
subsection (b) determines that a violation of subsection (a) has 
occurred, the court may order the health care entity or plan that 
committed the violation--
            (1) to reinstate the employee to his or her former 
        position;
            (2) to pay compensatory damages to the employee;
            (3) to pay reasonable costs and attorneys fees incurred by 
        the employee in bringing such action; and
            (4) to take such other appropriate actions to remedy any 
        past discrimination.

SEC. 5543. GENERAL NONPREEMPTION OF RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.

    Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to deny, impair, or 
otherwise adversely affect a right or remedy available under law to any 
person, except to the extent the right or remedy is inconsistent with 
this title.

                    Subtitle G--Repeal of Exemption

SEC. 5601. REPEAL OF EXEMPTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE.

    (a) In General.--Section 3 of the Act of March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 
1013), known as the McCarran-Ferguson Act, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
    ``(c) Notwithstanding that the business of insurance is regulated 
by State law, nothing in this Act shall limit the applicability of the 
following Acts to the business of insurance to the extent that such 
business relates to the provision of health benefits:
            ``(1) The Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1 et seq.).
            ``(2) The Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12 et seq.).
            ``(3) Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
            ``(4) The Act of June 19, 1936 (49 Stat. 1526; 15 U.S.C. 
        21a et seq.), known as the Robinson-Patman Antidiscrimination 
        Act.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the first day of the sixth month beginning after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

              TITLE VI--INDIVIDUAL AND EMPLOYER SUBSIDIES

       Subtitle A--Individual Premium and Cost-Sharing Assistance

SEC. 6001. REQUIREMENT TO OPERATE STATE PROGRAM.

    (a) In General.--A participating State shall have in effect a 
program for furnishing premium assistance and cost-sharing assistance 
in accordance with this subtitle for calendar years beginning after 
1996.
    (b) Designation of State Agency.--A State may designate any 
appropriate State agency to administer the program under this subtitle.

SEC. 6002. ASSISTANCE WITH STANDARD HEALTH PLAN PREMIUMS.

    (a) Eligibility.--
            (1) In general.--An eligible individual (as defined in 
        section 6008(4)) who has been determined by a State under 
        section 6004 to be a premium subsidy eligible individual (as 
        defined in paragraph (2)) shall be eligible for premium 
        assistance in the amount determined under subsection (b).
            (2) Premium subsidy eligible individual.--For purposes of 
        this subtitle, the term ``premium subsidy eligible individual'' 
        means any of the following individuals:
                    (A) Individuals with incomes below a certain income 
                threshold.--An eligible individual who has a family 
                income determined under section 6008(3) which does not 
                exceed 200 percent of the poverty line (as defined in 
                section 6008(5)).
                    (B) Children.--An eligible individual who--
                            (i) is a child (as defined in section 
                        6008(2));
                            (ii) has a family income determined under 
                        section 6008(3) which does not exceed 240 
                        percent of the poverty line; and
                            (iii) has not been enrolled in a health 
                        plan during the 6-month period ending on the 
                        date the individual submits an application to 
                        the State for premium assistance under this 
                        subtitle.
                    (C) Pregnant women.--An eligible individual who--
                            (i) is a pregnant woman (as defined in 
                        section 6008(6));
                            (ii) has a family income determined under 
                        section 6008(3) which does not exceed 240 
                        percent of the poverty line; and
                            (iii) is not enrolled in a health plan on 
                        the date the individual submits an application 
                        to the State for premium assistance under this 
                        subtitle.
            (3) Special rule with respect to children and pregnant 
        women.--An eligible individual may not be a premium subsidy 
        eligible individual described in subparagraphs (B) or (C) of 
        paragraph (2) if an employer contribution of at least 80 
        percent of the premium under a standard health plan that is 
        available to the individual through the employer is made or 
        offered to be made on behalf of the individual.
    (b) Amount of Assistance.--
            (1) In general.--
                    (A) Formula.--The amount of premium assistance for 
                a month for a premium subsidy eligible individual is--
                            (i) the least of --
                                    (I) the subsidy percentage 
                                specified in paragraph (2) multiplied 
                                by \1/12\th of the annual premium paid 
                                for coverage under a standard health 
                                plan in which the individual is 
                                enrolled;
                                    (II) the subsidy percentage 
                                specified in paragraph (2) multiplied 
                                by \1/12\th of the weighted average 
                                annual premium rate (as defined in 
                                subparagraph (B)) for all community-
                                rated standard health plans offered in 
                                the community rating area in which the 
                                individual resides; or
                                    (III) the subsidy percentage 
                                specified in paragraph (2) multiplied 
                                by \1/12\th of the annual reference 
                                premium for the community rating area 
                                in which the individual resides (as 
                                defined in subparagraph (C)); minus
                            (ii) the amount of any employer 
                        contribution made or offered to be made on 
                        behalf of the individual for coverage under the 
                        standard health plan that is available to the 
                        individual through an employer.
                    (B) Weighted average annual premium rate.--For 
                purposes of this paragraph, the term ``weighted average 
                annual premium rate'' means the average premium for the 
                community-rated standard health plans offered in the 
                community rating area in which the individual resides, 
                weighted to reflect the total enrollment of community-
                rated eligible individuals among such plans.
                    (C) Reference premium.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, the term ``reference premium'' means the 
                reference premium established under section 4512 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
                    (D) Special rules for determining amount of 
                employer contributions.--For purposes of determining 
                the amount of an employer contribution under 
                subparagraph (A), the following rules shall apply:
                            (i) Family contributions.--If an employer 
                        makes a contribution on behalf of a family 
                        (rather than any particular individual) such 
                        contribution shall be allocated ratably among 
                        the individuals in the family.
                            (ii) Greatest employer contribution 
                        available.--The employer contribution with 
                        respect to any individual is the largest 
                        employer contribution offered to be made on 
                        behalf of the individual by the individual's 
                        employer or any employer of any member of the 
                        individual's family.
            (2) Subsidy percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), 
        the term ``subsidy percentage'' means the following:
                    (A) Individuals with incomes below certain income 
                threshold.--
                            (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clauses (ii) and (iii), for a premium subsidy 
                        eligible individual described in subsection 
                        (a)(2)(A), 100 percent reduced (but not below 
                        zero) by .80 percentage points for each 1 
                        percentage point (or portion thereof) by which 
                        such individual's family income exceeds 100 
                        percent of the poverty line.
                            (ii) AFDC recipients.--For a premium 
                        subsidy eligible individual described in 
                        subsection (a)(2)(A) who is a member of a 
                        family receiving aid to families with dependent 
                        children under part A or E of title IV of the 
                        Social Security Act, the subsidy percentage 
                        shall be 100 percent.
                            (iii) Non-cash medicaid eligibles.--
                                    (I) In general.--For a premium 
                                subsidy eligible individual described 
                                in subsection (a)(2)(A) who is a non-
                                cash medicaid eligible described in 
                                subclause (II), the subsidy percentage 
                                shall be 100 percent during the 6-month 
                                period beginning on January 1, 1997.
                                    (II) Non-cash medicaid eligible.--
                                The non-cash medicaid eligibles 
                                described in this subclause are 
                                individuals receiving medical 
                                assistance under the State plan under 
                                title XIX of the Social Security Act as 
                                of December 31, 1996, who are not 
                                individuals--
                                            (aa) who are members of a 
                                        family receiving aid to 
                                        families with dependent 
                                        children under part A or E of 
                                        title IV of the Social Security 
                                        Act;
                                            (bb) with respect to whom 
                                        supplemental security income 
                                        benefits are being paid under 
                                        title XVI of such Act; or
                                            (cc) eligible for benefits 
                                        under part A of title XVIII of 
                                        such Act.
                    (B) Children and pregnant women.--For a premium 
                subsidy eligible individual described in subparagraph 
                (B) or (C) of subsection (a)(2), 100 percent reduced 
                (but not below zero) by 1.82 percentage points for each 
                1 percentage point (or portion thereof) by which such 
                individuals family income exceeds 185 percent of the 
                poverty line.
    (c) Payments.--
            (1) In general.--The amount of the premium assistance 
        available to a premium subsidy eligible individual under 
        subsection (b) shall be paid by the State in which the 
        individual resides directly to the standard health plan in 
        which the individual is enrolled. Payments under the preceding 
        sentence shall commence in the first month during which the 
        individual is enrolled in a certified standard health plan and 
        determined under section 6004 to be a premium subsidy eligible 
        individual.
            (2) Special rule with respect to families with multiple 
        children.--If a family includes more than 1 child described in 
        subsection (a)(2)(B), no premium assistance may be paid to a 
        plan under paragraph (1) on behalf of any such child unless 
        such assistance is paid on behalf of all such children.
            (3) Administrative errors.--A State is financially 
        responsible for premium assistance paid based on an eligibility 
        determination error to the extent the State's error rate for 
        eligibility determinations exceeds a maximum permissible error 
        rate to be specified by the Secretary.

SEC. 6003. ASSISTANCE WITH COST-SHARING FOR STANDARD HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) Non-AFDC Low-Income Individuals.--
            (1) Individuals working for community-rated employers.--
                    (A) In general.--If a non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in subparagraph (B) is enrolled in 
                a community-rated standard health plan providing a high 
                cost-sharing schedule, such individual shall be 
                eligible for cost-sharing assistance consisting of a 
                reduction in the cost-sharing under such plan to the 
                level of a plan providing a low cost-sharing schedule.
                    (B) Individual described.--A non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in this subparagraph is an 
                individual who is employed by a community-rated 
                employer and who is unable to enroll in a standard 
                health plan--
                            (i) with a premium at or below the weighted 
                        average premium rate for all community-rated 
                        standard health plans offered through the 
                        purchasing cooperative offered by the 
                        individual's employer, and
                            (ii) providing a low or combination cost-
                        sharing schedule.
            (2) Individuals working for experience-rated employers.--
                    (A) In general.--If a non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in subparagraph (B) is enrolled in 
                an experience-rated standard health plan providing a 
                high cost-sharing schedule, such individual shall be 
                eligible for cost-sharing assistance consisting of a 
                reduction in the cost-sharing under such plan to the 
                level of a plan providing a low cost-sharing schedule.
                    (B) Individual described.--A non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in this subparagraph is an 
                individual who is employed by an experience-rated 
                employer and who is unable to enroll in a standard 
                health plan offered by such employer providing a low or 
                combination cost-sharing schedule.
            (3) Non-working individuals.--
                    (A) In general.--If a non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in subparagraph (B) is enrolled in 
                a community-rated standard plan providing a high cost-
                sharing schedule, such individual shall be eligible for 
                cost-sharing assistance consisting of a reduction in 
                the cost-sharing under such plan to the level of a plan 
                providing a low cost-sharing schedule.
                    (B) Individual described.--A non-AFDC low-income 
                individual described in this subparagraph is an 
                individual who is not employed and who is unable to 
                enroll in a standard health plan--
                            (i) with a premium at or below the weighted 
                        average premium rate for all community-rated 
                        standard health plans offered in the community 
                        rating area in which the individual resides, 
                        and
                            (ii) providing a low or combination cost-
                        sharing schedule.
            (4) Non-afdc low-income individual.--For purposes of this 
        subsection, the term ``non-AFDC low-income individual'' means 
        an eligible individual who--
                    (A) has a family income determined under section 
                6008(3) which does not exceed 150 percent of the 
                poverty line; and
                    (B) is not a member of a family receiving aid to 
                families with dependent children under part A or E of 
                title IV of the Social Security Act.
    (b) AFDC Recipients.--
            (1) Low or combination cost-sharing plan.--An AFDC 
        recipient enrolled in a community-rated standard plan--
                    (A) with a premium at or below the weighted average 
                premium rate for all community rated-standard health 
                plans offered in the community rating area in which the 
                individual resides, and
                    (B) providing a low or combination cost-sharing 
                schedule,
        shall be eligible for cost-sharing assistance consisting of a 
        reduction in the amount of copayment applied with respect to an 
        item or service in an amount equal to 20 percent of the 
        copayment amount otherwise applicable under the plan, rounded 
        to the nearest dollar.
            (2) High cost-sharing plan.--If an AFDC recipient is unable 
        to enroll in a health plan described in paragraph (1) and such 
        individual is enrolled in a community-rated standard plan 
        providing a high cost-sharing schedule, such individual shall 
        be eligible for cost-sharing assistance consisting of a 
        reduction in the cost-sharing under such plan to the level of a 
        plan providing a low cost-sharing schedule.
            (3) AFDC recipient.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
        term ``AFDC recipient'' means an eligible individual who is a 
        member of a family receiving aid to families with dependent 
        children under part A or E of title IV of the Social Security 
        Act.
    (c) Notification of Health Plans.--If a State determines that an 
individual is eligible for cost-sharing assistance under this section, 
the State shall notify the standard health plan in which such 
individual is enrolled of such determination in a timely manner.

SEC. 6004. ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
specifying requirements for State programs under this subtitle with 
respect to determining eligibility for premium and cost-sharing 
assistance.
    (b) Specifications for Regulations.--The regulations promulgated by 
the Secretary under subsection (a) shall include the following 
requirements:
            (1) Frequency of applications.--A State program shall 
        provide that an individual may file an application for 
        assistance with an agency designated by the State at any time, 
        in person or by mail.
            (2) Application form.--A State program shall provide for 
        the use of an application form developed by the Secretary under 
        subsection (c).
            (3) Distribution of applications.--A State program shall 
        make applications accessible at locations where individuals are 
        most likely to obtain the applications.
            (4) Requirement to submit revised application.--A State 
        program shall require individuals to submit revised 
        applications to reflect changes in estimated family incomes, 
        including changes in employment status of family members, 
        during the year. The State shall revise the amount of any 
        premium assistance based on such a revised application.
            (5) Verification.--A State program shall provide for 
        verification of the information supplied in applications under 
        this subtitle. Such verification may include examining return 
        information disclosed to the State for such purpose under 
        section 6103(l)(15) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
    (c) Administration of State Programs.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish standards 
        for States operating programs under this subtitle which ensure 
        that such programs are operated in a uniform manner with 
        respect to application procedures, data processing systems, and 
        such other administrative activities as the Secretary 
        determines to be necessary.
            (2) Application forms.--The Secretary shall develop an 
        application form for assistance which shall--
                    (A) be simple in form and understandable to the 
                average individual;
                    (B) require the provision of information necessary 
                to make a determination as to whether an individual is 
                eligible for assistance, including a declaration of 
                estimated income by the individual based, at the 
                election of the individual--
                            (i) on multiplying by a factor of 4 the 
                        individual's family income for the 3-month 
                        period immediately preceding the month in which 
                        the application is made; or
                            (ii) on estimated income for the entire 
                        year for which the application is submitted; 
                        and
                    (C) require attachment of such documentation as 
                deemed necessary by the Secretary in order to ensure 
                eligibility for assistance.
    (d) Effectiveness of Eligibility.--A determination by a State that 
an individual is a premium subsidy eligible individual or an individual 
eligible for cost-sharing assistance shall be effective for the 
calendar year for which such determination is made unless a revised 
application submitted under subsection (b)(4) indicates that an 
individual is no longer eligible for assistance.
    (e) Penalties for Material Misrepresentations.--
            (1) In general.--Any individual who knowingly makes a 
        material misrepresentation of information in an application for 
        assistance under this subtitle shall be liable to the Federal 
        Government for the amount any assistance received by individual 
        on the basis of a misrepresentation and interest on such amount 
        at a rate specified by the Secretary, and, shall, in addition, 
        be liable to the Federal Government for $2,000 or, if greater, 
        3 times the amount any assistance received by individual on the 
        basis of a misrepresentation.
            (2) Collection of penalty amounts.--A State which receives 
        an application for assistance with respect to which a material 
        misrepresentation has been made shall collect the penalty 
        amount required under paragraph (1) and submit such amount to 
        the Secretary in a timely manner.

SEC. 6005. END-OF-YEAR RECONCILIATION FOR PREMIUM ASSISTANCE.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Requirement to file statement.--An individual who 
        received premium assistance under this subtitle from a State 
        for any month in a calendar year shall file with the State an 
        income reconciliation statement to verify the individual's 
        family income for the year. Such a statement shall be filed at 
        such time, and contain such information, as the State may 
        specify in accordance with regulations promulgated by the 
        Secretary.
            (2) Notice of requirement.--A State shall provide a written 
        notice of the requirement under paragraph (1) at the end of the 
        year to an individual who received premium assistance under 
        this subtitle from such State in any month during the year.
    (b) Reconciliation of Premium Assistance Based on Actual Income.--
            (1) In general.--Based on and using the income reported in 
        the reconciliation statement filed under subsection (a) with 
        respect to an individual, the State shall compute the amount of 
        premium assistance that should have been provided under this 
        subtitle with respect to the individual for the year involved.
            (2) Overpayment of assistance.--If the total amount of the 
        premium assistance provided was greater than the amount 
        computed under paragraph (1), the individual is liable to the 
        State to pay an amount equal to the amount of the excess 
        payment. Any amount collected by a State under this paragraph 
        shall be submitted to the Secretary in a timely manner.
            (3) Underpayment of assistance.--If the total amount of the 
        premium assistance provided was less than the amount computed 
        under paragraph (1), the State shall pay to the individual an 
        amount equal to the amount of the deficit.
            (4) State option.--A State may, in accordance with 
        regulations promulgated by the Secretary, establish a procedure 
        under which any overpayments or underpayments of premium 
        assistance determined under paragraphs (2) and (3) with respect 
        to an individual for a year may be collected or paid, as 
        appropriate, through adjustments to the premium assistance 
        furnished to such individual in the succeeding year.
    (c) Verification.--Each State may use such information as it has 
available to verify income of individuals with applications filed under 
this subtitle, including return information disclosed to the State for 
such purpose under section 6103(l)(15) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986.
    (d) Penalties for Failure to File.--In the case of an individual 
who is required to file a statement under this section in a year who 
fails to file such a statement, the entire amount of the premium 
assistance provided in such year shall be considered an excess amount 
under subsection (b)(2) and such individual shall not be eligible for 
premium assistance under this subtitle until such statement is filed. A 
State, using rules established by the Secretary, shall waive the 
application of this subsection if the individual establishes, to the 
satisfaction of the State under such rules, good cause for the failure 
to file the statement on a timely basis.
    (e) Penalties for False Information.--Any individual who provides 
false information in a statement filed under subsection (a) is subject 
to the same penalties as are provided under section 6004(e) for a 
misrepresentation of material fact described in such section.

SEC. 6006. ENROLLMENT OUTREACH.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under 
which each State operating a program for premium assistance under this 
subtitle shall have in effect an enrollment outreach system under which 
individuals may be determined eligible for such assistance by health 
care providers who furnish services to such individuals.
    (b) Specifications for Regulations.--The regulations promulgated by 
the Secretary under subsection (a) shall include the following 
requirements:
            (1) Health care providers.--Each State shall permit only 
        the classes or categories of health care providers determined 
        appropriate by the Secretary (referred to in this subsection as 
        ``eligible health care providers'') to participate in an 
        enrollment outreach system established by the State.
            (2) Application for assistance.--Each State shall develop 
        and make available to eligible health care providers in the 
        State an enrollment package for distribution to potentially 
        eligible individuals which includes a simple form for 
        individuals who receive services from such providers to apply 
        for premium assistance. Such form shall--
                    (A) permit an individual completing the form to 
                make a declaration that the individual is eligible for 
                a full subsidy under section 6002; and
                    (B) permit an individual to enroll in a community-
                rated standard health plan offered in the community 
                rating area in which the individual resides.
            (3) Submission of completed application.--An individual who 
        receives an enrollment application form from an eligible health 
        care provider may complete the form and submit it to the 
        individual's provider or the State agency operating the program 
        for premium assistance under this subtitle. If a health care 
        provider receives an application under this section the 
        provider shall submit the application to the State agency 
        administering the premium assistance program under this 
        subtitle within a period of time determined appropriate by the 
        Secretary in regulations.
            (4) Selection of health plan.--An individual may select a 
        community-rated standard health plan with which to enroll on 
        the date the individual submits an application form under this 
        section or the individual may make such selection at a later 
        date determined appropriate by the Secretary in regulations. If 
        an individual fails to select a health plan with which to 
        enroll by the date determined appropriate by the Secretary, the 
        State agency shall select such a plan for the individual.
            (5) Effective date of enrollment.--An individual who is 
        enrolled in a community-rated standard health plan in 
        accordance with the enrollment eligibility system established 
        under this section shall be an enrollee of the plan as of the 
        date the individual submits an application to the State agency 
        or a health care provider.
            (6) Period of eligibility.--An individual who submits an 
        application to a health care provider under an enrollment 
        outreach system under this section shall be eligible for 
        premium assistance under this subtitle for the period beginning 
        on the date such application is submitted and ending 60 days 
        after such date.
            (7) No state responsibility for administrative errors.--
        Section 6002(c)(3) shall not apply to any eligibility 
        determinations made under this section.
            (8) No reconciliation required.--The reconciliation 
        provisions of section 6005 shall not apply to any premium 
        assistance paid on behalf of an individual during a period of 
        eligibility for such assistance under this section.
            (9) Requirement on states.--During a period of eligibility 
        for premium assistance under this section, an individual shall 
        be given an opportunity by a State to apply for continuing 
        eligibility for premium assistance under this subtitle.

SEC. 6007. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Payments from the Secretary.--A State operating a 
        program for furnishing premium assistance under this subtitle 
        shall be entitled to receive payments from the Secretary in an 
        amount equal to the premium assistance paid on behalf of 
        individuals eligible for such assistance under this subtitle. 
        Such payments shall be made at such time and in such form as 
        provided in regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
            (2) State entitlement.--This subsection constitutes budget 
        authority in advance of appropriations Acts, and represents the 
        obligation of the Federal Government to provide payments to 
        States operating programs under this subtitle in accordance 
        with this section.
    (b) State Assessments for Administration Costs.--A State operating 
a program for furnishing premium and cost-sharing assistance under this 
subtitle may impose a premium assessment on the insured health plans 
offered in the State in an amount not to exceed one percent of the 
amount of the premium. Amounts collected pursuant to this subsection 
may only be used to cover the administrative costs of the State in 
operating such program.
    (c) Audits.--The Secretary shall conduct regular audits of the 
activities under the State programs conducted under this subtitle.

SEC. 6008. DEFINITIONS AND DETERMINATIONS OF INCOME.

    For purposes of this subtitle:
            (1) Standard health plan.--The term ``standard health 
        plan'' means a health plan (as defined in section 1011(2)(B)) 
        providing the standard benefits package as described in section 
        1201(a).
            (2) Child.--The term ``child'' means an individual who is 
        under 19 years of age.
            (3) Determinations of income.--
                    (A) Family income.--The term ``family income'' 
                means, with respect to an individual who--
                            (i) is not a dependent (as defined in 
                        subparagraph (B)) of another individual, the 
                        sum of the modified adjusted gross incomes (as 
                        defined in subparagraph (D)) for the 
                        individual, the individual's spouse, and 
                        children who are dependents of the individual; 
                        or
                            (ii) is a dependent of another individual, 
                        the sum of the modified adjusted gross incomes 
                        for the other individual, the other 
                        individual's spouse, and children who are 
                        dependents of the other individual.
                    (B) Dependent.--The term ``dependent'' shall have 
                the meaning given such term under section 152 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
                    (C) Special rule for foster children.--For purposes 
                of subparagraph (A), a child who is placed in foster 
                care by a State agency shall not be considered a 
                dependent of another individual.
                    (D) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term 
                ``modified adjusted gross income'' means adjusted gross 
                income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal 
                Revenue Code of 1986)--
                            (i) determined without regard to sections 
                        135, 162(l), 911, 931, and 933 of such Code, 
                        and
                            (ii) increased by--
                                    (I) the amount of interest received 
                                or accrued by the individual during the 
                                taxable year which is exempt from tax, 
                                and
                                    (II) the amount of the social 
                                security benefits (as defined in 
                                section 86(d) of such Code) received 
                                during the taxable year to the extent 
                                not included in gross income under 
                                section 86 of such Code.
                The determination under the preceding sentence shall be 
                made without regard to any carryover or carryback.
                    (E) Special rule for individuals temporarily 
                unemployed.--
                            (i) In general.--For purposes of 
                        determining eligibility for premium assistance 
                        under this subtitle for an individual who 
                        becomes unemployed, such individual's spouse, 
                        and children who are dependents of such 
                        individual, the family income for such 
                        individuals determined under subparagraph (A) 
                        shall be reduced--
                                    (I) for each month before and after 
                                the period of unemployment, by an 
                                amount equal to the lesser of the gross 
                                wages of the individual for the month 
                                or \1/12\th of the amount equal to 75 
                                percent of the poverty line for an 
                                individual; and
                                    (II) for each month after the date 
                                the individual becomes unemployed, by 
                                an amount equal to any unemployment 
                                compensation under an unemployment 
                                compensation law of a State or of the 
                                United States received by or on behalf 
                                of the unemployed individual.
                            (ii) Limitation.--Clause (i) shall no 
                        longer apply to an individual on the earlier 
                        of--
                                    (I) the date on which the period of 
                                unemployment ends; or
                                    (II) the end of the 6-month period 
                                beginning on the first day of the first 
                                month during which the individual 
                                receives premium assistance under this 
                                subtitle that would not be available to 
                                such individual if the provisions of 
                                clause (i) did not apply.
                            (iii) Special rule.--Clause (i) shall not 
                        apply if an employer contribution of at least 
                        80 percent of the premium under a standard 
                        health plan is available to the unemployed 
                        individual through an employer of a member of 
                        the individual's family.
            (4) Eligible individual.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``eligible individual'' 
                means an individual who is residing in the United 
                States and who is--
                            (i) a citizen or national of the United 
                        States; or
                            (ii) an alien permanently residing in the 
                        United States under color of law (as defined in 
                        subparagraph (C)).
                    (B) Exclusion.--The term ``eligible individual'' 
                shall not include an individual who is an inmate of a 
                public institution (except as a patient of a medical 
                institution).
                    (C) Alien permanently residing in the united states 
                under color of law.--The term ``alien permanently 
                residing in the United States under color of law'' 
                means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
                residence (within the meaning of section 101(a)(20) of 
                the Immigration and Nationality Act), and includes any 
                of the following:
                            (i) An alien who is admitted as a refugee 
                        under section 207 of the Immigration and 
                        Nationality Act.
                            (ii) An alien who is granted asylum under 
                        section 208 of such Act.
                            (iii) An alien whose deportation is 
                        withheld under section 243(h) of such Act.
                            (iv) An alien who is admitted for temporary 
                        residence under section 210, 210A, or 245A of 
                        such Act.
                            (v) An alien who has been paroled into the 
                        United States under section 212(d)(5) of such 
                        Act for an indefinite period or who has been 
                        granted extended voluntary departure as a 
                        member of a nationality group.
                            (vi) An alien who is the spouse or 
                        unmarried child under 21 years of age of a 
                        citizen of the United States, or the parent of 
                        such a citizen if the citizen is over 21 years 
                        of age, and with respect to whom an application 
                        for adjustment to lawful permanent residence is 
                        pending.
            (5) Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' means, for a 
        family for a year, the official poverty line (as defined by the 
        Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in 
        accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
        Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size 
        involved.
            (6) Pregnant woman.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``pregnant woman'' 
                includes a woman deemed to be a pregnant woman under 
                subparagraph (B).
                    (B) Period after termination of pregnancy.--For 
                purposes of this subtitle, a woman shall be deemed to 
                be a pregnant woman during the period beginning on the 
                date of the termination of the pregnancy and ending on 
                the first day of the first month that begins more than 
                90 days after such date.

                     Subtitle B--Employer Subsidies

SEC. 6101. PURPOSE.

    It is the purpose of this subtitle to provide subsidies to eligible 
employers to assist such employers in providing, or expanding the 
provision of, health care coverage for the employees of such employers.

SEC. 6102. ELIGIBLE EMPLOYERS.

    (a) In General.--To be eligible for a subsidy under this subtitle 
an employer shall--
            (1) comply with the requirements of part 1 of subtitle D of 
        title I;
            (2) contribute to the cost of health care coverage for all 
        employees of the same class (limited to full- or part-time) 
        employed by the employer;
            (3) contribute not less than 50 percent of the cost of 
        health care coverage for each class of family enrollment for 
        each employee so covered; and
            (4) prepare and submit to the Secretary of Labor an 
        application, at such time, in such manner and containing such 
        information as the Secretary may require.
    (b) Application of Requirements.--
            (1) In general.--The requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) 
        of subsection (a) shall only apply with respect to the 
        employees described in paragraph (2).
            (2) Coverage of employees.--The employees described in this 
        paragraph are those employees--
                    (A) for which the employer is contributing to the 
                costs of health care coverage; and
                    (B) for which the employer did not make such a 
                contribution prior to the date of enactment of this 
                Act.
    (c) Sole Proprietorships.--A sole proprietorship with not less than 
3 full-time employees (including the sole proprietor) shall be eligible 
for a subsidy under this subtitle if such proprietorship reports the 
payment of wages (as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), in 
the year prior to the year for which the subsidy is applied for, in an 
amount required under regulations promulgated by the Secretary of 
Labor.
    (d) Ineligibility.--
            (1) Self-employed.--A self-employed individual (as such 
        term is defined in section 1011(c)) shall not be eligible for a 
        subsidy under this subtitle.
            (2) Employee leasing firms.--An employer that is an 
        employee leasing firm shall not be eligible for a subsidy under 
        this subtitle. The Secretary of Labor shall promulgate 
        regulations defining the term ``employee leasing firm''.
            (3) State or local governments.--An employer that is a 
        State or local government shall not be eligible for a subsidy 
        under this section.

SEC. 6103. EMPLOYER CERTIFICATION.

    (a) Requirement.--An employer that submits an application under 
section 6102(a)(4) shall certify that such employer, prior to the date 
of enactment of this Act, did not contribute to the costs of health 
care coverage for the employees for which the employer is applying for 
the subsidy.
    (b) Contribution Limit.--For purposes of subsection (a), an 
employer shall be treated as having contributed to the health care 
coverage of an employee if the amount of such contribution is $500 or 
more (as annualized).
    (c) Union Sickness Funds.--For purposes of this subtitle, employers 
that contribute to union sickness funds on behalf of their employees 
shall be deemed to have contributed to the costs of health care 
coverage for the employees of such employer.
    (d) Regulations.--For purposes of this section, the Secretary of 
Labor shall promulgate regulations to enable an employer to determine 
whether and to what extent an employer contributed to the costs of an 
employee's health care coverage prior to the date of enactment of this 
Act. An employer shall utilize such regulations in submitting a 
certification under this section.

SEC. 6104. AMOUNT OF SUBSIDY.

    (a) In General.--With respect to an employee for which a subsidy 
application submitted by an employer has been approved by the Secretary 
of Labor under this subtitle, the employer shall receive a subsidy (to 
be paid over a 5-year period) in an amount that equals--
            (1) with respect to the first 3 years after the date of 
        enactment of this Act--
                    (A)(i) in the case of a community-rated employer, 
                50 percent of the lesser of--
                            (I) the weighted average premium rate (as 
                        defined in section 6002(b)(1)(C)) for the 
                        purchasing cooperative through which the 
                        employer has contributed to the employee's 
                        health care coverage (for the year involved);
                            (II) the community-rate of the standard 
                        health plan under which the employee received 
                        coverage (for the year involved); or
                            (III) the weighted average premium rate of 
                        the community rating area in which the employee 
                        resides; or
                    (ii) in the case of an experience-rated employer, 
                50 percent of the lesser of--
                            (I) the weighted average premium rate of 
                        the community rating area in which the employee 
                        resides; or
                            (II) the premium rate for the experience-
                        rated plan under which the employee received 
                        coverage (for the year involved);
                less
                    (B) 12 percent of the wages of the employee (for 
                the year involved);
            (2) with respect to the fourth year after the date of 
        enactment of this Act--
                    (A) 37.5 percent of the lesser of the amounts 
                referred to in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) (for 
                the type of employer and the year involved); less
                    (B) 12 percent of the wages of the employee (for 
                the year involved); and
            (3) with respect to the fifth year after the date of 
        enactment of this Act--
                    (A) 25 percent of the lesser of the amounts 
                referred to in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) (for 
                the type of employer and the year involved); less
                    (B) 12 percent of the wages of the employee (for 
                the year involved).
    (b) Limitations.--
            (1) Amount of contribution.--If, in applying the formula 
        under subsection (a), the Secretary of Labor determines that an 
        employer's contributions to the health care coverage costs of 
        its employees exceeds 50 percent of the weighted average 
        premium rate for the purchasing cooperative through which the 
        employer has so contributed (for the year involved), the 
        Secretary shall notify such employer that such employer is not 
        eligible for a subsidy under this subtitle.
            (2) Part-time employees.--With respect to subsidies for 
        health care coverage for part-time employee, the Secretary of 
        Labor shall develop a formula for the pro-rata reduction in 
        such subsidies based on the formula described in subsection (a) 
        and the hours of work performed by the employee.
            (3) Single subsidy.--An employer shall not be eligible to 
        receive more than one subsidy under this section. The Secretary 
        of Labor shall promulgate regulations to ensure that no 
        employer will receive a second or subsequent subsidy under this 
        subtitle regardless of whether such employer had previously 
        received the previous subsidy as an employer in a capacity 
        different from that of the employer's present capacity.

SEC. 6105. DEFINITION.

    For purposes of this Act, an employee who is employed by an 
employer--
            (1) for at least 120 hours in a month shall be deemed to be 
        employed on a full-time basis with respect to that month, or
            (2) for at least 40 hours, but less than 120 hours, in a 
        month shall be deemed to be employed on a part-time basis.

                     TITLE VII--REVENUE PROVISIONS

SEC. 7000. AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.

    Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal 
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to 
be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986.

                    Subtitle A--Financing Provisions

              PART 1--INCREASE IN TAX ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS

SEC. 7101. INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

    (a) Cigarettes.--Subsection (b) of section 5701 is amended by 
striking paragraph (1) and all that follows and inserting the 
following:
            ``(1) Small cigarettes.--On cigarettes, weighing not more 
        than 3 pounds per thousand, the amount per thousand determined 
        under the following table:


 
                                                            The tax per
          ``In the case of cigarettes removed--            thousand is--
 
  After July 31, 1995, and before January 1, 1997.......      $19.50
  During 1997...........................................      $24.50
  During 1998...........................................      $29.50
  After December 31, 1998...............................      $34.50.
 

            ``(2) Large cigarettes.--On cigarettes, weighing more than 
        3 pounds per thousand, removed at any time, an amount per 
        thousand equal to 2.1 times the tax per thousand imposed by 
        paragraph (1) on cigarettes removed at such time; except that, 
        if more than 6\1/2\ inches in length, they shall be taxable at 
        the rate prescribed for cigarettes weighing not more than 3 
        pounds per thousand, counting each 2\3/4\ inches, or fraction 
        thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.''
    (b) Cigars.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 5701(a) are amended 
to read as follows:
            ``(1) Small cigars.--On cigars, weighing not more than 3 
        pounds per thousand, the amount per thousand determined under 
        the following table:


 
                                                            The tax per
            ``In the case of cigars removed--              thousand is--
 
  After July 31, 1995, and before January 1, 1997.......       $1.83
  During 1997...........................................       $2.30
  During 1998...........................................       $2.77
  After December 31, 1998...............................      $3.23.
 

            ``(2) Large cigars.--On cigars, weighing more than 3 pounds 
        per thousand, the applicable percentage (determined under the 
        following table) of the price for which sold but not more than 
        the applicable limitation (determined under such table) per 
        thousand:


 
                                          The applicable
    ``In the case of cigars removed--     percentage is-- The limitation
                                                               is--
 
After July 31, 1995 and before January      21 percent        $48.75
 1, 1997................................
During 1997.............................    26 percent        $61.26
During 1998.............................    31 percent        $73.74
After December 31, 1998.................    37 percent       $86.25.''
 

    (c) Cigarette Papers.--Subsection (c) of section 5701 is amended--
            (1) by striking ``0.75 cent (0.625 cent on cigarette papers 
        removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``the amount 
        determined in accordance with the following table'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:


 
                                                            The tax for
       ``In the case of cigarette papers removed--        each 50 papers
                                                               is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........    1.22 cents
  During 1997...........................................    1.53 cents
  During 1998...........................................    1.84 cents
  After December 31, 1998...............................   2.16 cents.''
 

    (d) Cigarette Tubes.--Subsection (d) of section 5701 is amended--
            (1) by striking ``1.5 cents (1.25 cents on cigarette tubes 
        removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``the amount 
        determined in accordance with the following table'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:


 
                                                            The tax for
       ``In the case of cigarette tubes removed--          each 50 tubes
                                                               is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........    2.44 cents
  During 1997...........................................    3.06 cents
  During 1998...........................................    3.69 cents
  After December 31, 1998...............................   4.31 cents.''
 

    (e) Snuff.--Paragraph (1) of section 5701(e) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``36 cents (30 cents on snuff removed 
        during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``the amount determined in 
        accordance with the following table'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:


 
                                                            The tax per
            ``In the case of snuff removed--                pound is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........    58.5 cents
  During 1997...........................................    73.5 cents
  During 1998...........................................    88.5 cents
  After December 31, 1998...............................   $1.03\1/2\.''
 

    (f) Chewing Tobacco.--Paragraph (2) of section 5701(e) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``12 cents (10 cents on chewing tobacco 
        removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``the amount 
        determined in accordance with the following table'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:


 
                                                            The tax per
       ``In the case of chewing tobacco removed--           pound is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........    19.5 cents
  During 1997...........................................    24.5 cents
  During 1998...........................................    29.5 cents
  After December 31, 1998...............................   34.5 cents.''
 

    (g) Pipe Tobacco.--Subsection (f) of section 5701 is amended--
            (1) by striking ``67.5 cents (56.25 cents on pipe tobacco 
        removed during 1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``the amount 
        determined in accordance with the following table'', and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:


 
                                                            The tax per
         ``In the case of pipe tobacco removed--            pound is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........       $1.10
  During 1997...........................................       $1.38
  During 1998...........................................       $1.66
  After December 31, 1998...............................     $1.94.''
 

    (h) Application of Tax Increase to Puerto Rico.--Section 5701 is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(h) Application of Taxes to Puerto Rico.--Notwithstanding 
subsections (b) and (c) of section 7653 and any other provision of 
law--
            ``(1) In general.--On tobacco products and cigarette papers 
        and tubes, manufactured in or imported into the Commonwealth of 
        Puerto Rico, there is hereby imposed a tax at the rate equal to 
        the excess of--
                    ``(A) the rate of tax applicable under this section 
                to like articles manufactured in the United States, 
                over
                    ``(B) the rate referred to in subparagraph (A) as 
                in effect on the day before the date of the enactment 
                of the Health Security Act.
            ``(2) Shipments to puerto rico from the united states.--
        Only the rates of tax in effect on the day before the date of 
        the enactment of the Health Security Act shall be taken into 
        account in determining the amount of any exemption from, or 
        credit or drawback of, any tax imposed by this section on any 
        article shipped to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico from the 
        United States.
            ``(3) Shipments from puerto rico to the united states.--The 
        rates of tax taken into account under section 7652(a) with 
        respect to tobacco products and cigarette papers and tubes 
        coming into the United States from the Commonwealth of Puerto 
        Rico shall be the rates of tax in effect on the day before the 
        date of the enactment of the Health Security Act.
            ``(4) Disposition of revenues.--The provisions of section 
        7652(a)(3) shall not apply to any tax imposed by reason of this 
        subsection.''
    (i) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to articles removed (as defined in section 5702(k) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this Act) after July 31, 
1995.
    (j) Floor Stocks Taxes.--
            (1) Imposition of tax.--On tobacco products and cigarette 
        papers and tubes manufactured in or imported into the United 
        States or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico which are removed 
        before any tax-increase date and held on such date for sale by 
        any person, there is hereby imposed a tax in an amount equal to 
        the excess of--
                    (A) the tax which would be imposed under section 
                5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on the 
                article if the article had been removed on such date, 
                over
                    (B) the prior tax (if any) imposed under section 
                5701 or 7652 of such Code on such article.
            (2) Authority to exempt cigarettes held in vending 
        machines.--To the extent provided in regulations prescribed by 
        the Secretary, no tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1) on 
        cigarettes held for retail sale on any tax-increase date, by 
        any person in any vending machine. If the Secretary provides 
        such a benefit with respect to any person, the Secretary may 
        reduce the $500 amount in paragraph (3) with respect to such 
        person.
            (3) Credit against tax.--Each person shall be allowed as a 
        credit against the taxes imposed by paragraph (1) on each tax-
        increase date an amount equal to $500. Such credit shall not 
        exceed the amount of taxes imposed by paragraph (1) on such 
        date for which such person is liable.
            (4) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
                    (A) Liability for tax.--A person holding any 
                article on any tax-increase date to which any tax 
                imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for 
                such tax.
                    (B) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
                paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the 
                Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
                    (C) Time for payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph 
                (1) on any tax-increase date shall be paid on or before 
                the date which is 3 months after such tax-increase 
                date.
            (5) Articles in foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the 
        Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a) and any 
        other provision of law, any article which is located in a 
        foreign trade zone on any tax-increase date shall be subject to 
        the taxes imposed by paragraph (1) if--
                    (A) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or 
                customs duties liquidated, with respect to such article 
                before such date pursuant to a request made under the 
                1st proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
                    (B) such article is held on such date under the 
                supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the 2d 
                proviso of such section 3(a).
            (6) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
                    (A) Tax-increase date.--The term ``tax-increase 
                date'' means August 1, 1995, January 1, 1997, January 
                1, 1998, and January 1, 1999.
                    (B) Other definitions.--Terms used in this 
                subsection which are also used in section 5702 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall have the respective 
                meanings such terms have in such section, as amended by 
                this Act.
                    (C) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the 
                Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
            (7) Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules of 
        section 5061(e)(3) of such Code shall apply for purposes of 
        this subsection.
            (8) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
        including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes 
        imposed by section 5701 of such Code shall, insofar as 
        applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
        subsection, apply to the floor stocks taxes imposed by 
        paragraph (1), to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed 
        by such section 5701. The Secretary may treat any person who 
        bore the ultimate burden of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) as 
        the person to whom a credit or refund under such provisions may 
        be allowed or made.

SEC. 7102. MODIFICATIONS OF CERTAIN TOBACCO TAX PROVISIONS.

    (a) Exemption for Exported Tobacco Products and Cigarette Papers 
and Tubes To Apply Only to Articles Marked for Export.--
            (1) Subsection (b) of section 5704 is amended by adding at 
        the end the following new sentence: ``Tobacco products and 
        cigarette papers and tubes may not be transferred or removed 
        under this subsection unless such products or papers and tubes 
        bear such marks, labels, or notices as the Secretary shall by 
        regulations prescribe.''
            (2) Section 5761 is amended by redesignating subsections 
        (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively, and by 
        inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
    ``(c) Sale of Tobacco Products and Cigarette Papers and Tubes for 
Export.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (d) of section 
5704--
            ``(1) every person who sells, relands, or receives within 
        the jurisdiction of the United States any tobacco products or 
        cigarette papers or tubes which have been labeled or shipped 
        for exportation under this chapter,
            ``(2) every person who sells or receives such relanded 
        tobacco products or cigarette papers or tubes, and
            ``(3) every person who aids or abets in such selling, 
        relanding, or receiving,
shall, in addition to the tax and any other penalty provided in this 
title, be liable for a penalty equal to the greater of $1,000 or 5 
times the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter. All tobacco 
products and cigarette papers and tubes relanded within the 
jurisdiction of the United States, and all vessels, vehicles, and 
aircraft used in such relanding or in removing such products, papers, 
and tubes from the place where relanded, shall be forfeited to the 
United States.''
            (3) Subsection (a) of section 5761 is amended by striking 
        ``subsection (b)'' and inserting ``subsection (b) or (c)''.
            (4) Subsection (d) of section 5761, as redesignated by 
        paragraph (2), is amended by striking ``The penalty imposed by 
        subsection (b)'' and inserting ``The penalties imposed by 
        subsections (b) and (c)''.
            (5)(A) Subpart F of chapter 52 is amended by adding at the 
        end the following new section:

``SEC. 5754. RESTRICTION ON IMPORTATION OF PREVIOUSLY EXPORTED TOBACCO 
              PRODUCTS.

    ``(a) In General.--Tobacco products and cigarette papers and tubes 
previously exported from the United States may be imported or brought 
into the United States only as provided in section 5704(d). For 
purposes of this section, section 5704(d), section 5761, and such other 
provisions as the Secretary may specify by regulations, references to 
exportation shall be treated as including a reference to shipment to 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
    ``(b) Cross Reference.--

                                ``For penalty for the sale of tobacco 
products and cigarette papers and tubes in the United States which are 
labeled for export, see section 5761(c).''
            (B) The table of sections for subpart F of chapter 52 is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new item:

                              ``Sec. 5754. Restriction on importation 
                                        of previously exported tobacco 
                                        products.''
    (b) Importers Required To Be Qualified.--
            (1) Sections 5712, 5713(a), 5721, 5722, 5762(a)(1), and 
        5763 (b) and (c) are each amended by inserting ``or importer'' 
        after ``manufacturer''.
            (2) The heading of subsection (b) of section 5763 is 
        amended by inserting ``Qualified Importers,'' after 
        ``Manufacturers,''.
            (3) The heading for subchapter B of chapter 52 is amended 
        by inserting ``and Importers'' after ``Manufacturers''.
            (4) The item relating to subchapter B in the table of 
        subchapters for chapter 52 is amended by inserting ``and 
        importers'' after ``manufacturers''.
    (c) Repeal of Tax-Exempt Sales to Employees of Cigarette 
Manufacturers.--
            (1) Subsection (a) of section 5704 is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``Employee Use or'' in the heading, 
                and
                    (B) by striking ``for use or consumption by 
                employees or'' in the text.
            (2) Subsection (e) of section 5723 is amended by striking 
        ``for use or consumption by their employees, or for 
        experimental purposes'' and inserting ``for experimental 
        purposes''.
    (d) Repeal of Tax-Exempt Sales to United States.--Subsection (b) of 
section 5704 is amended by striking ``and manufacturers may similarly 
remove such articles for use of the United States;''.
    (e) Books of 25 or Fewer Cigarette Papers Subject to Tax.--
Subsection (c) of section 5701 is amended by striking ``On each book or 
set of cigarette papers containing more than 25 papers,'' and inserting 
``On cigarette papers,''.
    (f) Storage of Tobacco Products.--Subsection (k) of section 5702 is 
amended by inserting ``under section 5704'' after ``internal revenue 
bond''.
    (g) Authority To Prescribe Minimum Manufacturing Activity 
Requirements.--Section 5712 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of 
paragraph (1), by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and by 
inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
            ``(2) the activity proposed to be carried out at such 
        premises does not meet such minimum capacity or activity 
        requirements as the Secretary may prescribe, or''.
    (h) Special Rules Relating to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.--
Section 7652 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
    ``(h) Limitation on Cover Over of Tax on Tobacco Products.--For 
purposes of this section, with respect to taxes imposed under section 
5701 or this section on any tobacco product or cigarette paper or tube, 
the amount covered into the treasuries of Puerto Rico and the Virgin 
Islands shall not exceed the rate of tax under section 5701 in effect 
on the article on the day before the date of the enactment of the 
Health Security Act.''
    (i) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to articles removed (as defined in section 5702(k) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by this Act) after December 
31, 1994.

SEC. 7103. IMPOSITION OF EXCISE TAX ON MANUFACTURE OR IMPORTATION OF 
              ROLL-YOUR-OWN TOBACCO.

    (a) In General.--Section 5701 (relating to rate of tax), as amended 
by section 7101, is amended by redesignating subsections (g) and (h) as 
subsections (h) and (i) and by inserting after subsection (f) the 
following new subsection:
    ``(g) Roll-Your-Own Tobacco.--On roll-your-own tobacco, 
manufactured in or imported into the United States, there shall be 
imposed a tax of the amount determined in accordance with the following 
table per pound (and a proportionate tax at the like rate on all 
fractional parts of a pound).


 
                                                            The tax per
    ``In the case of roll-your-own tobacco removed--        pound is--
 
  After July 31, 1995 and before January 1, 1997........       $1.10
  During 1997...........................................       $1.38
  During 1998...........................................       $1.66
  After December 31, 1998...............................     $1.94.''
 

    (b) Roll-Your-Own Tobacco.--Section 5702 (relating to definitions) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(p) Roll-Your-Own Tobacco.--The term `roll-your-own tobacco' 
means any tobacco which, because of its appearance, type, packaging, or 
labeling, is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased 
by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes.''
    (c) Technical Amendments.--
            (1) Subsection (c) of section 5702 is amended by striking 
        ``and pipe tobacco'' and inserting ``pipe tobacco, and roll-
        your-own tobacco''.
            (2) Subsection (d) of section 5702 is amended--
                    (A) in the material preceding paragraph (1), by 
                striking ``or pipe tobacco'' and inserting ``pipe 
                tobacco, or roll-your-own tobacco'', and
                    (B) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
                following new paragraph:
            ``(1) a person who produces cigars, cigarettes, smokeless 
        tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own tobacco solely for the 
        person's own personal consumption or use, and''.
            (3) The chapter heading for chapter 52 is amended to read 
        as follows:

    ``CHAPTER 52--TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND CIGARETTE PAPERS AND TUBES''.

            (4) The table of chapters for subtitle E is amended by 
        striking the item relating to chapter 52 and inserting the 
        following new item:

                              ``Chapter 52. Tobacco products and 
                                        cigarette papers and tubes.''
    (d) Effective Date.--
            (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
        apply to roll-your-own tobacco removed (as defined in section 
        5702(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by 
        this Act) after July 31, 1995.
            (2) Transitional rule.--Any person who--
                    (A) on the date of the enactment of this Act is 
                engaged in business as a manufacturer of roll-your-own 
                tobacco or as an importer of tobacco products or 
                cigarette papers and tubes, and
                    (B) before August 1, 1995, submits an application 
                under subchapter B of chapter 52 of such Code to engage 
                in such business,
        may, notwithstanding such subchapter B, continue to engage in 
        such business pending final action on such application. Pending 
        such final action, all provisions of such chapter 52 shall 
        apply to such applicant in the same manner and to the same 
        extent as if such applicant were a holder of a permit under 
        such chapter 52 to engage in such business.

                   PART 2--HEALTH RELATED ASSESSMENTS

SEC. 7111. ASSESSMENTS ON INSURED AND SELF-INSURED HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) General Rule.--Subtitle D (relating to miscellaneous excise 
taxes) is amended by adding after chapter 36 the following new chapter:

                ``CHAPTER 37--HEALTH RELATED ASSESSMENTS

                              ``Subchapter A. Insured and self-insured 
                                        health plans.

         ``Subchapter A--Insured and Self-Insured Health Plans

                              ``Sec. 4501. Health insurance and health-
                                        related administrative 
                                        services.
                              ``Sec. 4502. Self-insured health plans.
                              ``Sec. 4503. Definitions and special 
                                        rules.

``SEC. 4501. HEALTH INSURANCE AND HEALTH-RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE 
              SERVICES.

    ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed--
            ``(1) on each taxable health insurance policy, a tax equal 
        to 1.75 percent of the premiums received under such policy, and
            ``(2) on each amount received for health-related 
        administrative services, a tax equal to 1.75 percent of the 
        amount so received.
    ``(b) Liability for Tax.--
            ``(1) Health insurance.--The tax imposed by subsection 
        (a)(1) shall be paid by the issuer of the policy.
            ``(2) Health-related administrative services.--The tax 
        imposed by subsection (a)(2) shall be paid by the person 
        providing the health-related administrative services.
    ``(c) Taxable Health Insurance Policy.--For purposes of this 
section--
            ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
        section, the term `taxable health insurance policy' means any 
        insurance policy providing accident or health insurance with 
        respect to individuals residing in the United States.
            ``(2) Exemption of certain policies.--The term `taxable 
        health insurance policy' does not include any insurance policy 
        if substantially all of the coverage provided under such policy 
        relates to--
                    ``(A) liabilities incurred under workers' 
                compensation laws,
                    ``(B) tort liabilities,
                    ``(C) liabilities relating to ownership or use of 
                property,
                    ``(D) credit insurance, or
                    ``(E) such other similar liabilities as the 
                Secretary may specify by regulations.
            ``(3) Special rule where policy provides other coverage.--
        In the case of any taxable health insurance policy under which 
        amounts are payable other than for accident or health coverage, 
        in determining the amount of the tax imposed by subsection 
        (a)(1) on any premium paid under such policy, there shall be 
        excluded the amount of the charge for the nonaccident or health 
        coverage if--
                    ``(A) the charge for such nonaccident or health 
                coverage is either separately stated in the policy, or 
                furnished to the policyholder in a separate statement, 
                and
                    ``(B) such charge is reasonable in relation to the 
                total charges under the policy.
        In any other case, the entire amount of the premium paid under 
        such a policy shall be subject to tax under subsection (a)(1).
            ``(4) Treatment of prepaid health coverage arrangements.--
                    ``(A) In general.--In the case of any arrangement 
                described in subparagraph (B)--
                            ``(i) such arrangement shall be treated as 
                        a taxable health insurance policy,
                            ``(ii) the payments or premiums referred to 
                        in subparagraph (B)(i) shall be treated as 
                        premiums received for a taxable health 
                        insurance policy, and
                            ``(iii) the person referred to in 
                        subparagraph (B)(i) shall be treated as the 
                        issuer.
                    ``(B) Description of arrangements.--An arrangement 
                is described in this subparagraph if under such 
                arrangement--
                            ``(i) fixed payments or premiums are 
                        received as consideration for any person's 
                        agreement to provide or arrange for the 
                        provision of accident or health coverage to 
                        residents of the United States, regardless of 
                        how such coverage is provided or arranged to be 
                        provided, and
                            ``(ii) substantially all of the risks of 
                        the rates of utilization of services is assumed 
                        by such person or the provider of such 
                        services.
    ``(d) Health-Related Administrative Services.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `health-related administrative services' means--
            ``(1) the processing of claims or performance of other 
        administrative services in connection with accident or health 
        coverage under a taxable health insurance policy if the charge 
        for such services is not included in the premiums under such 
        policy, and
            ``(2) processing claims, arranging for provision of 
        accident or health coverage, or performing other administrative 
        services in connection with an applicable self-insured health 
        plan (as defined in section 4502(c)) established or maintained 
        by a person other than the person performing the services.
For purposes of paragraph (1), rules similar to the rules of subsection 
(c)(3) shall apply.

``SEC. 4502. SELF-INSURED HEALTH PLANS.

    ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--In the case of any applicable self-
insured health plan, there is hereby imposed a tax for each month equal 
to 1.75 percent of the sum of--
            ``(1) the accident or health coverage expenditures for such 
        month under such plan, and
            ``(2) the direct administrative expenditures for such month 
        under such plan.
    ``(b) Liability for Tax.--
            ``(1) In general.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall 
        be paid by the plan sponsor.
            ``(2) Plan sponsor.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
        term `plan sponsor' means--
                    ``(A) the employer in the case of a plan 
                established or maintained by a single employer,
                    ``(B) the employee organization in the case of a 
                plan established or maintained by an employee 
                organization, or
                    ``(C) in the case of--
                            ``(i) a plan established or maintained by 2 
                        or more employers or jointly by 1 or more 
                        employers and 1 or more employee organizations,
                            ``(ii) a voluntary employees' beneficiary 
                        association under section 501(c)(9), or
                            ``(iii) a plan described in subsection 
                        (c)(2)(F),
                the association, committee, joint board of trustees, 
                cooperative, or other similar group of representatives 
                of the parties who establish or maintain the plan.
    ``(c) Applicable Self-Insured Health Plan.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `applicable self-insured health plan' means any plan 
for providing accident or health coverage if--
            ``(1) any portion of such coverage is provided other than 
        through an insurance policy, and
            ``(2) such plan is established or maintained--
                    ``(A) by one or more employers for the benefit of 
                their employees or former employees,
                    ``(B) by one or more employee organizations for the 
                benefit of their members or former members,
                    ``(C) jointly by 1 or more employers and 1 or more 
                employee organizations for the benefit of employees or 
                former employees,
                    ``(D) by a voluntary employees' beneficiary 
                association described in section 501(c)(9),
                    ``(E) by any organization described in section 
                501(c)(6), or
                    ``(F) in the case of a plan not described in the 
                preceding subparagraphs, by a multiple employer welfare 
                arrangement, a rural electric cooperative, or a rural 
                telephone cooperative association, as such terms are 
                defined in section 3(40) of the Employee Retirement 
                Income Securities Act of 1974.
    ``(d) Accident or Health Coverage Expenditures.--For purposes of 
this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The accident or health coverage 
        expenditures of any applicable self-insured health plan for any 
        month are the aggregate expenditures paid in such month for 
        accident or health coverage provided under such plan to the 
        extent such expenditures are not subject to tax under section 
        4501.
            ``(2) Treatment of reimbursements.--In determining accident 
        or health coverage expenditures during any month of any 
        applicable self-insured health plan, reimbursements (by 
        insurance or otherwise) received during such month shall be 
        taken into account as a reduction in accident or health 
        coverage expenditures.
            ``(3) Certain expenditures disregarded.--Paragraph (1) 
        shall not apply to any expenditure for the acquisition or 
        improvement of land or for the acquisition or improvement of 
        any property to be used in connection with the provision of 
        accident or health coverage which is subject to the allowance 
        under section 167, except that, for purposes of paragraph (1), 
        allowances under section 167 shall be considered as 
        expenditures.
    ``(e) Direct Administrative Expenditures.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `direct administrative expenditures' means the 
administrative expenditures under the plan to the extent such 
expenditures are not subject to tax under section 4501. In determining 
the amount of such expenditures, rules similar to the rules of 
subsection (d)(3) shall apply.

``SEC. 4503. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.

    ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this subchapter--
            ``(1) Accident or health coverage.--The term `accident or 
        health coverage' means any coverage which, if provided by an 
        insurance policy, would cause such policy to be a taxable 
        health insurance policy (as defined in section 4501(c)).
            ``(2) Insurance policy.--The term `insurance policy' means 
        any policy or other instrument whereby a contract of insurance 
        is issued, renewed, or extended.
            ``(3) Premium.--The term `premium' means the gross amount 
        of premiums and other consideration (including advance 
        premiums, deposits, fees, and assessments) arising from 
        policies issued by a person acting as the primary insurer, 
        adjusted for any return or additional premiums paid as a result 
        of endorsements, cancellations, audits, or retrospective 
        rating. Amounts returned where the amount is not fixed in the 
        contract but depends on the experience of the insurer or the 
        discretion of management shall not be included in return 
        premiums.
            ``(4) United states.--The term `United States' includes any 
        possession of the United States.
    ``(b) Treatment of Governmental Entities.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this subchapter--
                    ``(A) the term `person' includes any governmental 
                entity, and
                    ``(B) notwithstanding any other law or rule of law, 
                governmental entities shall not be exempt from the 
                taxes imposed by this subchapter except as provided in 
                paragraph (2).
            ``(2) Exempt governmental programs.--In the case of an 
        exempt governmental program--
                    ``(A) no tax shall be imposed under section 4501 on 
                any premium received pursuant to such program or on any 
                amount received for health-related administrative 
                services pursuant to such program, and
                    ``(B) no tax shall be imposed under section 4502 on 
                any expenditures pursuant to such program.
            ``(3) Exempt governmental program.--For purposes of this 
        subchapter, the term `exempt governmental program' means--
                    ``(A) the insurance programs established by parts A 
                and B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
                    ``(B) the medical assistance program established by 
                title XIX of the Social Security Act,
                    ``(C) any program established by Federal law for 
                providing medical care (other than through insurance 
                policies) to individuals (or the spouses and dependents 
                thereof) by reason of such individuals being--
                            ``(i) members of the Armed Forces of the 
                        United States, or
                            ``(ii) veterans, and
                    ``(D) any program established by Federal law for 
                providing medical care (other than through insurance 
                policies) to members of Indian tribes (as defined in 
                section 4(d) of the Indian Health Care Improvement 
                Act).
    ``(c) No Cover Over to Possessions.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, no amount collected under this subchapter shall be 
covered over to any possession of the United States.''
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle D is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 36 the 
following new item:

                              ``Chapter 37. Health related 
                                        assessments.''
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to premiums received, and expenses incurred, with 
respect to coverage for periods after December 31, 1995.

SEC. 7112. HIGH COST HEALTH PLAN ASSESSMENT.

    (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 37 (relating to 
assessments on insured and self-insured health benefits), as added by 
section 7111, is amended by adding at the end the following new part:

                   ``PART II--HIGH COST HEALTH PLANS

                              ``Subpart A. Community-rated plans.
                              ``Subpart B. Experience-rated plans.
                              ``Subpart C. Definitions and special 
                                        rules.

                   ``Subpart A--Community-Rated Plans

                              ``Sec. 4511. Community-rated plans.
                              ``Sec. 4512. Reference premiums.

``SEC. 4511. COMMUNITY-RATED PLANS.

    ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--
            ``(1) In general.--If a community-rated certified standard 
        health plan is a high cost plan for any coverage period 
        beginning after December 31, 1996, there is hereby imposed a 
        tax equal to 25 percent of the excess premiums of the plan for 
        the period.
            ``(2) Liability for tax.--The tax imposed by this section 
        shall be paid by the issuer of the high cost plan.
    ``(b) High Cost Plan.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) In general.--A plan is a high cost plan for any 
        coverage period if--
                    ``(A) it is operating within a noncompetitive 
                community rating area, and
                    ``(B) it has excess premiums for the period.
            ``(2) Noncompetitive community rating area.--A community 
        rating area is a noncompetitive community rating area for any 
        coverage period if, for the preceding coverage period--
                    ``(A) the weighted average premium per primary 
                insured in community-rated certified standard health 
                plans in the area, exceeded
                    ``(B) the weighted average reference premium for 
                all such plans.
        The determination under this paragraph shall be made on the 
        basis of enrollment during the annual open enrollment period 
        for such preceding coverage period.
    ``(c) Excess Premiums.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `excess premiums' means, with 
        respect to a certified standard health plan, the excess (if 
        any) of--
                    ``(A) the premiums received under the plan during 
                the coverage period, over
                    ``(B) the sum of the amounts determined under 
                paragraph (2) with respect to each class of enrollment.
            ``(2) Excess premium baseline.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The amount determined under this 
                paragraph for any class of enrollment for any coverage 
                period is an amount equal to the product of the 
                reference premium for such class and the number of 
                primary insureds in such class for the period.
                    ``(B) Proportionate reduction of reference 
                premium.--The reference premium applicable under 
                subparagraph (A) to an individual who was a primary 
                insured for only a portion of the coverage period shall 
                be proportionately reduced to reflect the period the 
                individual was not a primary insured.
            ``(3) Disregard of age adjustment.--The amount determined 
        under paragraph (1)(A) shall be adjusted to reflect the 
        premiums which would have been received if no age adjustment 
        were permitted under section 1116 of the Health Security Act.
            ``(4) Reduction for taxes.--The amount determined under 
        paragraph (1)(A) shall be reduced by the amount of the tax 
        imposed by this section included in determining the amount of 
        the premiums.
    ``(d) Coverage Period.--For purposes of this subpart, the term 
`coverage period' means, with respect to any community rating area, the 
12-month period for which an individual is covered under a standard 
health plan if the individual enrolls in the plan during the annual 
open enrollment period for the area under section 1503 of the Health 
Security Act.
    ``(e) Plans Covering More Than One Area.--For purposes of this 
subpart, if a community-rated plan covers individuals residing in more 
than 1 community rating area, the plan shall be treated as a separate 
plan with respect to each such area.

``SEC. 4512. REFERENCE PREMIUMS.

    ``(a) Establishment of Reference Premiums.--For purposes of this 
subpart--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall, in consultation 
        with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, establish for 
        each coverage period a reference premium for each class of 
        enrollment for community-rated plans within a community rating 
        area. The Secretary shall publish such reference premiums 
        within a reasonable period of time before the annual open 
        enrollment period for the coverage period.
            ``(2) Method of determining reference premium.--Each 
        reference premium for a class of enrollment for any coverage 
        period shall be the reference premium in effect for such class 
        for the preceding coverage period--
                    ``(A) increased by the target growth rate for the 
                coverage period as provided under subsection (b)(1), 
                and
                    ``(B) adjusted to reflect--
                            ``(i) material changes in the 
                        characteristics of community-rated individuals 
                        as provided under subsection (b)(2), and
                            ``(ii) changes in the actuarial value of 
                        the standard benefits package as provided under 
                        subsection (b)(3).
    ``(b) Annual Adjustments to Reference Premiums.--For purposes of 
subsection (a)(2)--
            ``(1) Target growth rate.--The target growth rate for any 
        coverage period is the percentage increase in the Consumer 
        Price Index (as defined in section 1(f)(4)) which the Secretary 
        estimates will occur during the coverage period--
                    ``(A) increased by 2 percentage points (3 and 2.5 
                percentage points in the case of coverage periods 
                beginning in 1997 and 1998, respectively), and
                    ``(B) increased or decreased by the amount the 
                estimate under this paragraph was incorrect for the 
                preceding coverage period.
            ``(2) Material changes.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may, in 
                consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
                Services and pursuant to such method as the Secretary 
                prescribes, adjust the reference premium to reflect 
                changes in the demographic characteristics (including 
                factors such as age, gender, and socioeconomic status) 
                and health status of community-rated individuals in the 
                community rating area which are materially different 
                when compared to the average changes in such 
                characteristics and status in the United States.
                    ``(B) Effect on weighted average.--Any adjustments 
                under subparagraph (A) for any coverage period shall 
                not result in a change in the weighted average of such 
                factors for all community rating areas in the United 
                States.
            ``(3) Changes in benefit package.--If the actuarial value 
        of the standard benefits package is changed pursuant to 
        subtitle C of title I of the Health Security Act, the Secretary 
        shall adjust the reference premiums appropriately to reflect 
        such change.
    ``(c) Computation of Reference Premium for 1996.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall compute the 
        reference premium for each class of enrollment for 1996. Each 
        such reference premium shall be the reference premium which is 
        adjusted under subsection (a)(2) in determining the reference 
        premium for coverage periods beginning in 1997.
            ``(2) Method of determining reference premiums.--Each 
        reference premium under paragraph (1) shall be equal to the 
        national average per capita current coverage health 
        expenditures for 1994 (determined under subsection (d))--
                    ``(A) increased as provided in paragraph (3),
                    ``(B) adjusted to reflect the differences in the 
                community rating area as provided in paragraph (4), and
                    ``(C) modified to reflect the class of enrollment 
                for which it is being determined in the same manner as 
                premiums are modified under section 1116 of the Health 
                Security Act.
            ``(3) Updating for 1995 and 1996.--The Secretary shall 
        update the national average per capita current coverage health 
        expenditures for 1994 to reflect the annual percentage 
        increases for calendar years 1995 and 1996 in private sector 
        health care spending for items and services included in the 
        standard benefits package. Such increase shall not exceed the 
        current projected increase in per capita private health 
        insurance premiums for such years contained in the estimate of 
        national health insurance expenditures published by the 
        Congressional Budget Office in the fall of 1993.
            ``(4) Area adjustments.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, using 
                information of the type described in subparagraph (B), 
                establish an adjustment for each community rating area 
                which takes into account the differences among 
                community rating areas, including variations in health 
                care expenditures, in rates of uninsurance and 
                underinsurance, and in the proportion of expenditures 
                for services provided by academic health centers.
                    ``(B) Type of information.--The type of information 
                described in this subparagraph is--
                            ``(i) information on variations in premiums 
                        across States and across community rating areas 
                        within a State (based on surveys and other 
                        data);
                            ``(ii) information on variations in per 
                        capita health spending by State, as measured by 
                        the Secretary;
                            ``(iii) information on variations across 
                        States in per capita spending under the 
                        medicare program and in such spending among 
                        community rating areas within a State under 
                        such program; and
                            ``(iv) area rating factors commonly used by 
                        actuaries.
                    ``(C) Consultation process.--The Secretary shall, 
                in cooperation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
                Services, consult with representatives of States and 
                community rating areas before establishing the 
                adjustment under this subsection.
    ``(d) Determination of National Average per Capita Current Coverage 
Health Expenditures.--
            ``(1) In general.--The national average per capita current 
        coverage health expenditures are equal to--
                    ``(A) the total amount of covered current health 
                care expenditures described in paragraph (2), divided 
                by
                    ``(B) the estimated population in the United States 
                of community-rated individuals as of 1994 (as 
                determined under paragraph (4)) for whom such 
                expenditures were determined.
        The population under subparagraph (B) shall not include SSI 
        recipients.
            ``(2) Covered current health care expenditures.--
                    ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
                the term `covered current health care expenditures' 
                means the amount of total payments made in the United 
                States during 1994 (other than amounts for cost 
                sharing) for items and services included in the 
                standard benefits package.
                    ``(B) Removal of certain expenditures not to be 
                covered.--The amount determined under subparagraph (A) 
                shall be decreased by the proportion of such amount 
                that is attributable to any of the following:
                            ``(i) Medicare beneficiaries.
                            ``(ii) SSI recipients.
                            ``(iii) Expenditures which are paid for 
                        through workers' compensation or automobile or 
                        other liability insurance.
                            ``(iv) Any other expenditures by parties 
                        (including the Federal Government) that the 
                        Secretary estimates will not be payable by 
                        community-rated plans for coverage under the 
                        standard benefits package.
                    ``(C) Addition of projected expenditures for 
                uninsured and underinsured individuals.--The amount 
                determined under subparagraph (A) (as adjusted under 
                subparagraph (B)) shall be increased to take into 
                account increased utilization of, and expenditures for, 
                items and services covered under the standard benefits 
                package likely to occur, as a result of coverage under 
                a community-rated plan of individuals who, as of 1994, 
                were uninsured or underinsured with respect to the 
                standard benefits package. In making such 
                determination, such expenditures shall be based on the 
                estimated average cost for such services in 1994 (and 
                not on private payment rates established for such 
                services). In making such determination, the estimated 
                amount of uncompensated care in 1994 shall be reduced 
                to reflect the number and characteristics of the 
                currently uninsured who will become insured by reason 
                of the Health Security Act and will not include 
                adjustments to offset payments below costs by public 
                programs.
                    ``(D) Addition of health plan administration 
                costs.--The amount determined under subparagraph (A) 
                (as adjusted under the preceding subparagraphs) shall 
                be increased by an estimated percentage (determined by 
                the Secretary, but no more than 15 percent) that 
                reflects the proportion of premiums that are required 
                for administration and for State premium taxes (which 
                taxes shall be limited to such amounts in 1994 as are 
                attributable to the health benefits to be included in 
                the standard benefits package).
                    ``(E) Decrease for cost sharing.--The amount 
                determined under subparagraph (A) (as adjusted under 
                the preceding subparagraphs) shall be decreased by a 
                percentage that reflects (i) the estimated average 
                percentage of total amounts payable for items and 
                services covered under the standard benefits package 
                that will be payments in the form of cost sharing under 
                a certified standard benefit plan with a high cost-
                sharing option, and (ii) the percentage reduction in 
                utilization estimated to result from the application of 
                such cost sharing.
            ``(3) Special rules.--
                    ``(A) Benefits used.--The determinations under this 
                subsection shall be based on the standard benefits 
                package as in effect in 1996.
                    ``(B) Assuming no change in expenditure pattern.--
                The determination under paragraph (2) shall be made 
                without regard to any change in the pattern of 
                expenditures that may result from the enrollment of SSI 
                recipients in community-rated plans.
            ``(4) Eligible individuals.--The determination of 
        individuals who are community-rated individuals under this 
        subsection shall be made as though the Health Security Act was 
        fully in effect in each State as of 1994.
    ``(e) Treatment of Certain States.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Nonparticipating states.--In the case of a State that 
        is not a participating State or otherwise has not established 
        community rating areas, the entire State shall be treated as a 
        single community rating area.
            ``(2) Changes in boundaries.--In the case of a State that 
        changes the boundaries of its community rating areas, the 
        Secretary shall provide a method for computing reference 
        premiums for each area affected by such change in a manner 
        that--
                    ``(A) reflects the factors taken into account in 
                establishing the adjustment factors under this section, 
                and
                    ``(B) results in the weighted average of the newly 
                computed reference premiums for the areas affected by 
                the change being equal to the weighted average of the 
                reference premiums for the areas as previously 
                established.

                  ``Subpart B--Experience-Rated Plans

                              ``Sec. 4515. Experience-rated plans.

``SEC. 4515. EXPERIENCE-RATED PLANS.

    ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--
            ``(1) In general.--In the case of any calendar year 
        beginning after December 31, 1999, there is hereby imposed a 
        tax equal to 25 percent of the excess premium equivalents of an 
        experience-rated standard health plan.
            ``(2) Liability for tax.--The tax imposed by this section 
        shall be paid by the plan sponsor.
    ``(b) Excess Premium Equivalents.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `excess premium equivalents' 
        means the excess (if any) of--
                    ``(A) the premium equivalents of the plan for the 
                calendar year, over
                    ``(B) the product of the reference premium and the 
                number of primary insureds covered by the plan during 
                the calendar year.
            ``(2) Proportionate reduction in reference premium.--The 
        reference premium applicable under paragraph (1)(B) to a 
        primary insured covered under the plan for only a portion of 
        the calendar year shall be proportionately reduced to reflect 
        the period the individual was not a primary insured.
    ``(c) Reference Premium.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The reference premium for any plan for 
        any calendar year shall be the reference premium in effect for 
        the preceding calendar year--
                    ``(A) increased by the target growth rate for the 
                calendar year as provided under paragraph (2), and
                    ``(B) adjusted to reflect--
                            ``(i) material changes in the 
                        characteristics of individuals covered by the 
                        plan as provided under paragraph (3), and
                            ``(ii) changes in the actuarial value of 
                        the standard benefits package as provided under 
                        paragraph (4).
            ``(2) Target growth rate.--The target growth rate for any 
        calendar year is the percentage increase in the Consumer Price 
        Index (as defined in section 1(f)(4)) which the Secretary 
        estimates will occur during the calendar year--
                    ``(A) increased by 2 percentage points, and
                    ``(B) increased or decreased by the amount the 
                estimate under this paragraph was incorrect for the 
                preceding calendar year.
            ``(3) Material changes.--The Secretary may, in consultation 
        with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, establish such 
        method as the Secretary determines appropriate for adjusting 
        the reference premium for any plan to reflect changes in the 
        demographic characteristics (including factors such as age, 
        gender, socioeconomic status, and class of enrollment) and 
        health status of individuals in the plan which are materially 
        different when compared to the average changes in such 
        characteristics and status in the United States.
            ``(4) Changes in benefit package.--If the actuarial value 
        of the standard benefits package is changed pursuant to 
        subtitle C of title I of the Health Security Act, the Secretary 
        shall adjust the reference premiums appropriately to reflect 
        such change.
    ``(d) Reference Premium for 1999.--
            ``(1) In general.--The reference premium for calendar year 
        1999 shall be equal to the average of the per capita premium 
        equivalents for calendar years 1997, 1998, and 1999. Such 
        reference premium shall be the reference premium which is 
        adjusted under subsection (c) for determining the reference 
        premium for calendar year 2000.
            ``(2) Per capita premium equivalent.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The per capita premium 
                equivalent for any calendar year shall be equal to the 
                premium equivalent for providing the standard benefits 
                package to each primary insured, adjusted as provided 
                under subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Growth factors.--The amount determined under 
                subparagraph (A)--
                            ``(i) for calendar year 1997 shall be 
                        increased by the target growth rates for 
                        calendar years 1998 and 1999, and
                            ``(ii) for calendar year 1998 shall be 
                        increased by the target growth rate for 
                        calendar year 1999.
                For purposes of this subparagraph, the target growth 
                rate shall be determined under subsection (c)(2), 
                except that subsection (c)(2)(A) shall be applied for 
                calendar year 1998 by substituting `2.5' for `2'.
    ``(e) Premium Equivalents.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `premium equivalents' means, 
        with respect to any calendar year, the sum of--
                    ``(A) expenditures described in subsections (d) and 
                (e) of section 4502 with respect to coverage under the 
                plan, and
                    ``(B) in the case of any coverage provided through 
                an insurance policy, premiums paid for such coverage.
            ``(2) Exclusion of nonstandard coverage.--The premium 
        equivalents for any calendar year shall not include amounts 
        with respect to--
                    ``(A) any coverage other than coverage for the 
                standard benefits package, or
                    ``(B) any cost-sharing coverage.
            ``(3) Risk adjustment payments.--The premium equivalents 
        for any calendar year shall include payments under any risk 
        adjustment program established under title I of the Health 
        Security Act.
            ``(4) Taxes disregarded.--The premium equivalents for any 
        calendar year shall not include the amount of any tax imposed 
        by this section.
    ``(f) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Aggregation rules.--
                    ``(A) Plans.--All plans maintained by the same plan 
                sponsor shall be treated as 1 plan.
                    ``(B) Sponsors.--All plan sponsors which are 
                treated as a single employer under subsection (b) or 
                (c) of section 414 shall be treated as 1 plan sponsor.
            ``(2) Startup plans.--If a plan sponsor first begins 
        operation of an experience-rated plan after 1997, the reference 
        premium for the first calendar year for which the plan is in 
        operation and to which this section applies shall, under 
        regulations prescribed by the Secretary, be determined as if 
        the reference premium for the preceding calendar year were 
        equal to the average of the reference premiums for all 
        community-rated plans for the preceding calendar year in the 
        areas in which the plan is operating, adjusted to reflect the 
        factors described in subsection (c)(3) under the plan which 
        materially differ from such factors under the community-rated 
        plans.
            ``(3) Acquisitions and dispositions.--The reference premium 
        after an acquisition or disposition described in section 
        41(f)(3) involving the plan sponsor of an experience-rated plan 
        shall be made pursuant to such regulations as the Secretary may 
        prescribe.
            ``(4) Information.--The Secretary may require a plan 
        sponsor of an experience-rated plan to adopt such conventions 
        as are necessary in its accounting practices and financial 
        records to assure that only costs related to the standard 
        benefits package are taken into account in determining the 
        premium equivalents with respect to the plan.

               ``Subpart C--Definitions and Special Rules

                              ``Sec. 4518. Right of recovery.
                              ``Sec. 4519. Definitions and special 
                                        rules.

``SEC. 4518. RIGHT OF RECOVERY FROM PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) General Rule.--Each issuer or plan sponsor of a certified 
standard health plan shall be entitled to recover from the providers of 
items or services covered by the plan an amount equal to 50 percent of 
the amount of any tax imposed by this part on the issuer or sponsor.
    ``(b) Recovery.--For purposes of subsection (a)--
            ``(1) any amount recovered from any provider shall not 
        exceed the provider's proportionate share of items or services 
        provided under the plan for the period the tax was imposed, and
            ``(2) an issuer or plan sponsor may recover an amount from 
        a provider through a reduction in payments under the plan, 
        direct payments from the provider, or such other manner as may 
        be provided under State law adopted pursuant to section 1510 of 
        the Health Security Act.
    ``(c) Balance Billing.--For prohibition of balance billing of any 
amount recovered from a provider under this section, see section 
1128(h)(3) of the Health Security Act.

``SEC. 4519. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.

    ``(a) Health Plans.--For purposes of this part--
            ``(1) Standard health plan.--The term `standard health 
        plan' has the meaning given such term by section 1011(2)(B) of 
        the Health Security Act, except that such term does not include 
        a plan offering the alternative standard benefit package 
        described in 1201(b) of such Act.
            ``(2) Standard benefits package.--The term `standard 
        benefits package' has the meaning given such term by section 
        1201(a) of such Act.
    ``(b) Community Rating Areas and Plans.--For purposes of this 
part--
            ``(1) Community rating area.--The term `community rating 
        area' means an area established under section 1502 of the 
        Health Security Act.
            ``(2) Community-rated plan.--The term `community-rated 
        plan' means a plan which is community-rated under section 1116 
        of such Act.
            ``(3) Experience-rated plan.--The term `experience-rated 
        plan' means any plan which is not a community-rated plan.
    ``(c) Premiums.--For purposes of this part--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `premium' has the meaning given 
        such term by section 4503(a)(3).
            ``(2) Administrative costs.--Amounts received for health-
        related administrative services (as defined in section 4501(d)) 
        provided in connection with any standard health plan taken into 
        account under section 4511(c)(3) shall be treated as premiums.
            ``(3) Risk adjustment payments.--Payments under a risk 
        adjustment program established under title I of the Health 
        Security Act shall be disregarded in computing the amount of 
        any premiums.
    ``(d) Insurance Policy and Plan Sponsor.--For purposes of this 
part--
            ``(1) Insurance policy.--The term `insurance policy' has 
        the meaning given such term by section 4503(a)(2).
            ``(2) Plan sponsor.--The term `plan sponsor' has the 
        meaning given such term by section 4502(b)(2), except that in 
        the case of a plan not described in such section, such term 
        means the person or persons who establish or maintain the plan.
    ``(e) Special Rules.--For purposes of this part--
            ``(1) Deposits.--The Secretary may require deposits of any 
        taxes imposed by subpart A or B at such times as the Secretary 
        determines appropriate.
            ``(2) Governmental entities subject to tax.--The rules of 
        section 4503(b) shall apply for purposes of this part.
            ``(3) No cover over to possessions.--Notwithstanding any 
        other provision of law, no amount collected under this part 
        shall be covered over to any possession of the United States.
    ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations as 
are necessary to carry out the provisions of this part, including 
regulations--
            ``(1) requiring the maintenance of such records, and the 
        reporting of such information as the Secretary determines 
        necessary, and
            ``(2) which provide that 2 or more plans of a person or any 
        related persons must be aggregated, or a plan must be treated 
        as 2 or more separate plans.''
    (b) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Subchapter A of chapter 37, as added by section 7111, 
        is amended by inserting after the subchapter heading the 
        following:

                              ``Part I. Premium and related 
                                        assessments.
                              ``Part II. High cost health plans.

              ``PART I--PREMIUM AND RELATED ASSESSMENTS''.

            (2) Section 4503, as so added, is amended by striking 
        ``subchapter'' each place it appears and inserting ``part''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1996.

           PART 3--RECAPTURE OF CERTAIN HEALTH CARE SUBSIDIES

SEC. 7121. RECAPTURE OF CERTAIN HEALTH CARE SUBSIDIES RECEIVED BY HIGH-
              INCOME INDIVIDUALS.

    (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at 
the end the following new part:

  ``PART VIII--CERTAIN HEALTH CARE SUBSIDIES RECEIVED BY HIGH-INCOME 
                              INDIVIDUALS

                              ``Sec. 59B. Recapture of certain health 
                                        care subsidies.

``SEC. 59B. RECAPTURE OF CERTAIN HEALTH CARE SUBSIDIES.

    ``(a) Imposition of Recapture Amount.--In the case of an 
individual, if the modified adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for 
the taxable year exceeds the threshold amount, such taxpayer shall pay 
(in addition to any other amount imposed by this subtitle) a recapture 
amount for such taxable year equal to the aggregate of the Medicare 
part B recapture amounts (if any) for months during such year that a 
premium is paid under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
for the coverage of the individual under such part.
    ``(b) Medicare Part B Premium Recapture Amount for Month.--For 
purposes of this section, the Medicare part B premium recapture amount 
for any month is the amount equal to the excess of--
            ``(1) 150 percent of the monthly actuarial rate for 
        enrollees age 65 and over determined for that calendar year 
        under section 1839(b) of the Social Security Act, over
            ``(2) the total monthly premium under section 1839 of the 
        Social Security Act (determined without regard to subsections 
        (b) and (f) of section 1839 of such Act).
    ``(c) Phase-in of Recapture Amount.--
            ``(1) In general.--If the modified adjusted gross income of 
        the taxpayer for any taxable year exceeds the threshold amount 
        by less than $15,000, the recapture amount imposed by this 
        section for such taxable year shall be an amount which bears 
        the same ratio to the recapture amount which would (but for 
        this subsection) be imposed by this section for such taxable 
        year as such excess bears to $15,000.
            ``(2) Joint returns.--If a recapture amount is determined 
        separately for each spouse filing a joint return, paragraph (1) 
        shall be applied by substituting `$30,000' for `$15,000' each 
        place it appears.
    ``(d) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
            ``(1) Threshold amount.--The term `threshold amount' 
        means--
                    ``(A) except as otherwise provided in this 
                paragraph, $90,000,
                    ``(B) $115,000 in the case of a joint return, and
                    ``(C) zero in the case of a taxpayer who--
                            ``(i) is married (as determined under 
                        section 7703) but does not file a joint return 
                        for such year, and
                            ``(ii) does not live apart from his spouse 
                        at all times during the taxable year.
            ``(2) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified 
        adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income--
                    ``(A) determined without regard to sections 135, 
                911, 931, and 933, and
                    ``(B) increased by the amount of interest received 
                or accrued by the taxpayer during the taxable year 
                which is exempt from tax.
            ``(3) Joint returns.--In the case of a joint return--
                    ``(A) the recapture amount under subsection (a) 
                shall be the sum of the recapture amounts determined 
                separately for each spouse, and
                    ``(B) subsections (a) and (c) shall be applied by 
                taking into account the combined modified adjusted 
                gross income of the spouses.
            ``(4) Coordination with other provisions.--
                    ``(A) Treated as tax for subtitle f.--For purposes 
                of subtitle F, the recapture amount imposed by this 
                section shall be treated as if it were a tax imposed by 
                section 1.
                    ``(B) Not treated as tax for certain purposes.--The 
                recapture amount imposed by this section shall not be 
                treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes 
                of determining--
                            ``(i) the amount of any credit allowable 
                        under this chapter, or
                            ``(ii) the amount of the minimum tax under 
                        section 55.
                    ``(C) Treated as payment for medical insurance.--
                The recapture amount imposed by this section shall be 
                treated as an amount paid for insurance covering 
                medical care, within the meaning of section 213(d).
            ``(5) Taxes imposed by possessions.--The tax imposed by 
        this section shall not apply to a bona fide resident of a 
        possession with respect to which the requirements of section 
        1509 of the Health Security Act are met.''
    (b) Transfers to Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
Fund.--
            (1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the 
        Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund amounts 
        equivalent to the aggregate increase in liabilities under 
        chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is 
        attributable to the application of section 59B(a) of such Code, 
        as added by this section.
            (2) Transfers.--The amounts appropriated by paragraph (1) 
        to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund shall 
        be transferred from time to time (but not less frequently than 
        quarterly) from the general fund of the Treasury on the basis 
        of estimates made by the Secretary of the Treasury of the 
        amounts referred to in paragraph (1). Any quarterly payment 
        shall be made on the first day of such quarter and shall take 
        into account the recapture amounts referred to in such section 
        59B(a) for such quarter. Proper adjustments shall be made in 
        the amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior 
        estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts required 
        to be transferred.
    (c) Reporting Requirements.--
            (1) Paragraph (1) of section 6050F(a) (relating to returns 
        relating to social security benefits) is amended by striking 
        ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B) and by inserting after 
        subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(D) the number of months during the calendar year 
                for which a premium was paid under part B of title 
                XVIII of the Social Security Act for the coverage of 
                such individual under such part, and''.
            (2) Paragraph (2) of section 6050F(b) is amended to read as 
        follows:
            ``(2) the information required to be shown on such return 
        with respect to such individual.''
            (3) Subparagraph (A) of section 6050F(c)(1) is amended by 
        inserting before the comma ``and in the case of the information 
        specified in subsection (a)(1)(D)''.
            (4) The heading for section 6050F is amended by inserting 
        ``and medicare part b coverage'' before the period.
            (5) The item relating to section 6050F in the table of 
        sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 
        61 is amended by inserting ``and Medicare part B coverage'' 
        before the period.
    (d) Waiver of Certain Estimated Tax Penalties.--No addition to tax 
shall be imposed under section 6654 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (relating to failure to pay estimated income tax) for any period 
before April 16, 1997, with respect to any underpayment to the extent 
that such underpayment resulted from section 59B(a) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section.
    (e) Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of 
chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new 
item:

                              ``Part VIII. Certain health care 
                                        subsidies received by high-
                                        income individuals.''
    (f) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.

                        PART 4--OTHER PROVISIONS

SEC. 7131. INCREASE IN TAX ON CERTAIN HOLLOW POINT AND LARGE CALIBER 
              HANDGUN AMMUNITION.

    (a) Increase in Manufacturers Tax.--
            (1) In general.--Section 4181 (relating to imposition of 
        tax on firearms) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``Shells, and cartridges'' and 
                inserting ``Shells and cartridges not taxable at 10,000 
                percent'', and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following:
            ``Articles taxable at 10,000 percent.--
                    ``Any jacketed, hollow point projectile which may 
                be used in a handgun and the jacket of which is 
                designed to produce, upon impact, sharp-tipped, barb-
                like projections that extend beyond the diameter of the 
                unfired projectile.
                    ``Any cartridge with a projectile measuring .500 
                inch or greater in diameter which may be used in a 
                handgun.''
            (2) Additional taxes added to the general fund.--Section 
        3(a) of the Act of September 2, 1937 (16 U.S.C. 669b(a)), 
        commonly referred to as the ``Pittman-Robertson Wildlife 
        Restoration Act'', is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new sentence: ``There shall not be covered into the 
        fund the portion of the tax imposed by such section 4181 that 
        is attributable to any increase in amounts received in the 
        Treasury under such section by reason of the amendments made by 
        section 7131(a)(1) of the Health Security Act, as estimated by 
        the Secretary.''
    (b) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
        apply to sales after December 31, 1994.
            (2) Floor stocks tax.--
                    (A) In general.--In the case of any article held on 
                January 1, 1995, which is taxable under section 4181 of 
                the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on and after such 
                date at a tax rate of 10,000 percent, there is hereby 
                imposed a tax equal to the excess of--
                            (i) the tax which would be imposed under 
                        section 4181 of such Code if the article were 
                        sold on such date, over
                            (ii) the prior tax (if any) imposed under 
                        such section on such article.
                    (B) Credit.--Each person shall be allowed as a 
                credit against the taxes imposed by subparagraph (A) an 
                amount equal to the taxes imposed on articles which 
                such person destroys (in such manner as the Secretary 
                may prescribe) after December 31, 1994, and before 
                April 1, 1995.
                    (C) Payment.--The taxes imposed by subparagraph (A) 
                on any article shall be paid by the person holding the 
                article on January 1, 1995. Such taxes shall be paid 
                before April 1, 1995, in such manner as the Secretary 
                of the Treasury may prescribe.
                    (D) Articles in foreign trade zones.--
                Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 
                19 U.S.C. 81a) and any other provision of law, any 
                article which is located in a foreign trade zone on 
                January 1, 1995, shall be subject to the tax imposed by 
                subparagraph (A) if--
                            (i) internal revenue taxes have been 
                        determined, or customs duties liquidated, with 
                        respect to such article before such date 
                        pursuant to a request made under the 1st 
                        proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
                            (ii) such article is held on such date 
                        under the supervision of a customs officer 
                        pursuant to the 2d proviso of such section 
                        3(a).
                    (E) Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules 
                of section 5061(e)(3) of such Code shall apply for 
                purposes of this paragraph.
                    (F) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
                including penalties, applicable with respect to the 
                taxes imposed by section 4181 of such Code shall, 
                insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the 
                provisions of this subsection, apply to the floor 
                stocks taxes imposed by subparagraph (A), to the same 
                extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 
                4181. The Secretary may treat any person who bore the 
                ultimate burden of the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) 
                as the person to whom a credit or refund under such 
                provisions may be allowed or made.

SEC. 7132. MODIFICATION TO SELF-EMPLOYMENT TAX TREATMENT OF CERTAIN S 
              CORPORATION SHAREHOLDERS AND PARTNERS.

    (a) Treatment of Certain S Corporation Shareholders.--
            (1) Amendment to internal revenue code.--Section 1402 
        (relating to definitions) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new subsection:
    ``(k) Treatment of Certain S Corporation Shareholders.--
            ``(1) In general.--In the case of any individual--
                    ``(A) who is a 2-percent shareholder (as defined in 
                section 1372(b)) of an S corporation for any taxable 
                year of such corporation, and
                    ``(B) who provides significant services to or on 
                behalf of such S corporation during such taxable year,
        such shareholder's net earnings from self-employment shall 
        include 80 percent of such shareholder's pro rata share (as 
        determined under section 1366(a)) of the taxable income or loss 
        of such corporation for such taxable year from service-related 
        businesses carried on by such corporation, and to the extent 
        provided in regulations, for any other taxable year to the 
        extent such income or loss is attributable to such services.
            ``(2) Certain exceptions to apply.--In determining the 
        amount to be taken into account under paragraph (1), the 
        exceptions provided in subsection (a) shall apply, except that, 
        in the case of the exceptions provided in subsection (a)(5), 
        rules similar to the rules of subparagraph (B) thereof shall 
        apply to shareholders in S corporations.
            ``(3) Service-related business.--For purposes of this 
        subsection, the term `service-related business' means--
                    ``(A) any trade or business involving the 
                performance of services in the fields of health (other 
                than with respect to inpatient personal care 
                facilities), law, engineering, architecture, 
                accounting, actuarial services, performing arts, 
                consulting, athletics, or financial services (other 
                than lending or brokerage services), or
                    ``(B) any other trade or business with respect to 
                which the Secretary determines that capital is an 
                insignificant income-producing factor.
            ``(4) Application of deferred compensation rules.--For 
        purposes of subchapter D of chapter 1 (and any other provision 
        of this title relating thereto), in the case of an individual 
        who is treated as having net earnings from self-employment by 
        reason of paragraph (1)--
                    ``(A) such individual shall not be treated as a 
                self-employed individual (within the meaning of section 
                401(c)(1)) with respect to services performed for the S 
                corporation, and
                    ``(B) such net earnings shall be treated as 
                compensation received by the individual as an employee 
                of the S corporation.''
            (2) Amendment to social security act.--Section 211 of the 
        Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new subsection:

           ``Treatment of Certain S Corporation Shareholders

    ``(k)(1) In the case of any individual--
            ``(A) who is a 2-percent shareholder (as defined in section 
        1372(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) of an S 
        corporation for any taxable year of such corporation, and
            ``(B) who provides significant services to or on behalf of 
        such S corporation during such taxable year,
such shareholder's net earnings from self-employment shall include 80 
percent of such shareholder's pro rata share (as determined under 
section 1366(a) of such Code) of the taxable income or loss of such 
corporation for such taxable year from service-related businesses (as 
defined in section 1402(k)(3) of such Code) carried on by such 
corporation, and to the extent provided in regulations, for any other 
taxable year to the extent such income or loss is attributable to such 
services.
    ``(2) In determining the amount to be taken into account under 
paragraph (1), the exceptions provided in subsection (a) shall apply, 
except that, in the case of the exceptions provided in subsection 
(a)(5), rules similar to the rules of subparagraph (B) thereof shall 
apply to shareholders in S corporations.''
    (b) Treatment of Certain Limited Partners.--
            (1) Amendment of the internal revenue code.--Paragraph (13) 
        of section 1402(a) is amended to read as follows:
            ``(13) there shall be excluded the distributive share of 
        any item of income or loss of a limited partner, as such, other 
        than--
                    ``(A) guaranteed payments described in section 
                707(c) to that partner for services actually rendered 
                to or on behalf of the partnership to the extent that 
                those payments are established to be in the nature of 
                remuneration for those services, or
                    ``(B) in the case of a limited partner who provides 
                significant services to or on behalf of the partnership 
                for any taxable year of the partnership, 80 percent of 
                the limited partner's distributive share (determined 
                without regard to payments described in subparagraph 
                (A)) of the taxable income or loss of such 
                partnership--
                            ``(i) for such taxable year from service-
                        related businesses (as defined in subsection 
                        (k)(3)) of such partnership, and
                            ``(ii) to the extent provided in 
                        regulations, for any other taxable year to the 
                        extent attributable to such services;''.
            (2) Amendment of the social security act.--Paragraph (12) 
        of section 211(a) of the Social Security Act is amended to read 
        as follows:
            ``(12) there shall be excluded the distributive share of 
        any item of income or loss of a limited partner, as such, other 
        than--
                    ``(A) guaranteed payments described in section 
                707(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to that 
                partner for services actually rendered to or on behalf 
                of the partnership to the extent that those payments 
                are established to be in the nature of remuneration for 
                those services, or
                    ``(B) in the case of a limited partner who provides 
                significant services to or on behalf of the partnership 
                for any taxable year of the partnership, 80 percent of 
                the limited partner's distributive share (determined 
                without regard to payments described in subparagraph 
                (A)) of the taxable income or loss of such 
                partnership--
                            ``(i) for such taxable year from service-
                        related businesses (as defined in section 
                        1402(k)(3) of such Code) of such partnership, 
                        and
                            ``(ii) to the extent provided in 
                        regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the 
                        Treasury, for any other taxable year to the 
                        extent attributable to such services;''.
    (c) Inventory Income.--Section 1402 (relating to definitions), as 
amended by subsection (a), is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
    ``(l) Inventory Income.--
            ``(1) In general.--The net earnings from self-employment of 
        any taxpayer for any taxable year under subsection (a) 
        (determined without regard to this subsection) shall be reduced 
        by 40 percent of the lesser of--
                    ``(A) the taxpayer's allocable share of net 
                inventory income, or
                    ``(B) the amount of such net earnings in excess of 
                the applicable amount for the taxable year.
            ``(2) Net inventory income.--
                    ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
                the term `net inventory income' means net income from 
                the sale of property described in section 1221(1).
                    ``(B) Dealers in securities.--For purposes of 
                subparagraph (A)--
                            ``(i) any security described in section 
                        475(c)(2) (without regard to the last sentence 
                        thereof) which is held by a person as a dealer 
                        in securities (as defined in section 475(c)(1)) 
                        shall be treated as property described in 
                        section 1221(1), and
                            ``(ii) net income from any such security 
                        shall be taken into account to the extent 
                        otherwise taken into account in computing net 
                        earnings from self-employment.
            ``(3) Applicable amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
        the term `applicable amount' means the excess of--
                    ``(A) $135,000, adjusted, in the case of any 
                taxable year beginning in any calendar year after 1996, 
                in the same manner as is used in adjusting the 
                contribution and benefit base for the calendar year 
                under section 230(b) of the Social Security Act, over
                    ``(B) the amount of wages paid to the individual 
                during the taxable year.''
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years of individuals beginning after December 31, 
1995, and to taxable years of S corporations and partnerships ending 
with or within such taxable years of individuals.

SEC. 7133. EXTENDING MEDICARE COVERAGE OF, AND APPLICATION OF HOSPITAL 
              INSURANCE TAX TO, ALL STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
              EMPLOYEES.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Application of hospital insurance tax.--Section 
        3121(u)(2) is amended by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D).
            (2) Coverage under medicare.--Section 210(p) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 410(p)) is amended by striking 
        paragraphs (3) and (4).
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall apply to services performed after September 30, 1995.
    (b) Transition in Benefits for State and Local Government Employees 
and Former Employees.--
            (1) In general.--
                    (A) Employees newly subject to tax.--For purposes 
                of sections 226, 226A, and 1811 of the Social Security 
                Act, in the case of any individual who performs 
                services during the calendar quarter beginning October 
                1, 1995, the wages for which are subject to the tax 
                imposed by section 3101(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
                of 1986 only because of the amendment made by 
                subsection (a), the individual's medicare qualified 
                State or local government employment (as defined in 
                subparagraph (B)) performed before October 1, 1995, 
                shall be considered to be ``employment'' (as defined 
                for purposes of title II of such Act), but only for 
                purposes of providing the individual (or another 
                person) with entitlement to hospital insurance benefits 
                under part A of title XVIII of such Act for months 
                beginning with October 1995.
                    (B) Medicare qualified state or local government 
                employment defined.--In this paragraph, the term 
                ``medicare qualified State or local government 
                employment'' means medicare qualified government 
                employment described in section 210(p)(1)(B) of the 
                Social Security Act (determined without regard to 
                section 210(p)(3) of such Act, as in effect before its 
                repeal under subsection (a)(2)).
            (2) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
        to be appropriated to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund 
        from time to time such sums as the Secretary of Health and 
        Human Services deems necessary for any fiscal year on account 
        of--
                    (A) payments made or to be made during such fiscal 
                year from such Trust Fund with respect to individuals 
                who are entitled to benefits under title XVIII of the 
                Social Security Act solely by reason of paragraph (1),
                    (B) the additional administrative expenses 
                resulting or expected to result therefrom, and
                    (C) any loss in interest to such Trust Fund 
                resulting from the payment of those amounts, in order 
                to place such Trust Fund in the same position at the 
                end of such fiscal year as it would have been in if 
                this subsection had not been enacted.
            (3) Information to individuals who are prospective medicare 
        beneficiaries based on state and local government employment.--
        Section 226(g) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 426(g)) is 
        amended--
                    (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (3) as 
                subparagraphs (A) through (C), respectively,
                    (B) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(g)'', and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following new 
                paragraph:
            ``(2) The Secretary, in consultation with State and local 
        governments, shall provide procedures designed to assure that 
        individuals who perform medicare qualified government 
        employment by virtue of service described in section 210(a)(7) 
        are fully informed with respect to (A) their eligibility or 
        potential eligibility for hospital insurance benefits (based on 
        such employment) under part A of title XVIII, (B) the 
        requirements for, and conditions of, such eligibility, and (C) 
        the necessity of timely application as a condition of becoming 
        entitled under subsection (b)(2)(C), giving particular 
        attention to individuals who apply for an annuity or retirement 
        benefit and whose eligibility for such annuity or retirement 
        benefit is based on a disability.''
    (c) Technical Amendments.--
            (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 3121(u)(2) is amended by 
        striking ``subparagraphs (B) and (C),'' and inserting 
        ``subparagraph (B),''.
            (2) Subparagraph (B) of section 210(p)(1) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 410(p)(1)) is amended by striking 
        ``paragraphs (2) and (3).'' and inserting ``paragraph (2).''
            (3) Section 218 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 418) 
        is amended by striking subsection (n).
            (4) The amendments made by this subsection shall apply 
        after September 30, 1995.

       Subtitle B--Tax Treatment of Employer-Provided Health Care

                       PART 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 7201. LIMITATION ON EXCLUSION FOR EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH 
              BENEFITS.

    (a) General Rule.--Section 106 (relating to contributions by 
employer to accident and health plans) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 106. CONTRIBUTIONS BY EMPLOYER TO ACCIDENT AND HEALTH PLANS.

    ``(a) General Rule.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, 
gross income of an employee does not include employer-provided coverage 
under an accident or health plan.
    ``(b) Inclusion of Certain Benefits Not Part of Permitted 
Coverage.--
            ``(1) In general.--Effective on and after January 1, 2004, 
        gross income of an employee shall include employer-provided 
        coverage under any accident or health plan which is not 
        permitted coverage.
            ``(2) Permitted coverage.--For purposes of this subsection, 
        the term `permitted coverage' means any--
                    ``(A) coverage under a certified standard health 
                plan (as defined in section 1011(2)(A) of the Health 
                Security Act),
                    ``(B) coverage under a certified supplemental 
                health benefit plan (as defined in section 1011(3)(A) 
                of the Health Security Act) which consists of the 
                payment of cost sharing amounts under a certified 
                standard health plan (as so defined) providing the 
                standard benefits package described in part 1 of 
                subtitle C of title I of such Act,
                    ``(C) coverage under a qualified long-term care 
                insurance policy (as defined in section 7702B(b)),
                    ``(D) coverage providing wages or payments in lieu 
                of wages for any period during which the employee is 
                absent from work on account of sickness or injury,
                    ``(E) coverage only for accidental death or 
                dismemberment,
                    ``(F) coverage under a medicare supplemental policy 
                (as defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social 
                Security Act),
                    ``(G) coverage under an equivalent health care 
                program (as defined in section 1013(3) of the Health 
                Security Act), and
                    ``(H) other coverage to the extent that the 
                Secretary determines that the continuation of an 
                exclusion for such coverage is not inconsistent with 
                the purposes of this subsection.
            ``(3) Special rules for flexible spending arrangements.--
                    ``(A) In general.--To the extent that any employer-
                provided coverage is provided through a flexible 
                spending or similar arrangement, paragraph (1) shall be 
                applied by substituting `January 1, 1996,' for `January 
                1, 2004'.
                    ``(B) Flexible spending arrangement.--For purposes 
                of this paragraph, a flexible spending arrangement is a 
                benefit program which provides employees with coverage 
                under which--
                            ``(i) specified incurred expenses may be 
                        reimbursed (subject to reimbursement maximums 
                        and other reasonable conditions), and
                            ``(ii) the maximum amount of reimbursement 
                        which is reasonably available to a participant 
                        for such coverage is less than 500 percent of 
                        the value of such coverage.
                In the case of an insured plan, the maximum amount 
                reasonably available shall be determined on the basis 
                of the underlying coverage.''
    (b) Employment Tax Treatment.--
            (1) Social security tax.--
                    (A) Subsection (a) of section 3121 is amended by 
                inserting after paragraph (21) the following new 
                sentence:
``Nothing in paragraph (2) shall exclude from the term `wages' any 
amount which is required to be included in gross income under section 
106(b).''
                    (B) Subsection (a) of section 209 of the Social 
                Security Act is amended by inserting after paragraph 
                (21) the following new sentence:
``Nothing in paragraph (2) shall exclude from the term `wages' any 
amount which is required to be included in gross income under section 
106(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''
            (2) Railroad retirement tax.--Paragraph (1) of section 
        3231(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
        sentence: ``Nothing in clause (i) of the second sentence of 
        this paragraph shall exclude from the term `compensation' any 
        amount which is required to be included in gross income under 
        section 106(b).''
            (3) Unemployment tax.--Subsection (b) of section 3306 is 
        amended by inserting after paragraph (16) the following new 
        sentence:
``Nothing in paragraph (2) shall exclude from the term `wages' any 
amount which is required to be included in gross income under section 
106(b).''
            (4) Wage withholding.--Subsection (a) of section 3401 is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new sentence:
``Nothing in the preceding provisions of this subsection shall exclude 
from the term `wages' any amount which is required to be included in 
gross income under section 106(b).''
    (c) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
        take effect on January 1, 1996.
            (2) Benefits provided pursuant to collective bargaining 
        agreements.--In the case of a flexible spending arrangement 
        maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining 
        agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more 
        employers which was ratified before June 30, 1994, the 
        amendments referred to in paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
        benefits pursuant to any such agreement before the later of--
                    (A) January 1, 1996, or
                    (B) the earlier of--
                            (i) the date on which the last of such 
                        agreements terminate (determined without regard 
                        to any extension thereof on or after June 30, 
                        1994), or
                            (ii) January 1, 1998.

SEC. 7202. HEALTH BENEFITS MAY NOT BE PROVIDED UNDER CAFETERIA PLANS.

    (a) General Rule.--Subsection (f) of section 125 (defining 
qualified benefits) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
sentence: ``Such term shall not include any benefits or coverage under 
an accident or health plan.''
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (g) of section 125 is amended 
by striking paragraph (2) and redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as 
paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
    (c) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
        take effect on January 1, 1997.
            (2) Benefits provided pursuant to collective bargaining 
        agreements.--In the case of a cafeteria plan maintained 
        pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between 
        employee representatives and 1 or more employers which was 
        ratified before June 30, 1994, the amendments referred to in 
        paragraph (1) shall not apply to benefits pursuant to any such 
        agreement before the later of--
                    (A) January 1, 1997, or
                    (B) the earlier of--
                            (i) the date on which the last of such 
                        agreements terminate (determined without regard 
                        to any extension thereof on or after June 30, 
                        1994), or
                            (ii) January 1, 1999.

SEC. 7203. INCREASE IN DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-
              EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.

    (a) Provision Made Permanent.--
            (1) In general.--Subsection (l) of section 162 (relating to 
        special rules for health insurance costs of self-employed 
        individuals) is amended by striking paragraph (6).
            (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
        shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
    (b) Amount of Deduction.--
            (1) In general.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 162(l) 
        are amended to read as follows:
            ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual who is an 
        employee within the meaning of section 401(c), there shall be 
        allowed as a deduction under this section an amount equal to 50 
        percent of the amount paid during the taxable year for coverage 
        under a certified standard health plan (as defined in section 
        1011(2)(A) of the Health Security Act).
            ``(2) Limitations.--
                    ``(A) Lower percentage in certain cases.--
                            ``(i) In general.--If the taxpayer has 1 or 
                        more employees in a trade or business with 
                        respect to which such taxpayer is treated as an 
                        employee within the meaning of section 401(c), 
                        the deduction under paragraph (1) shall not 
                        exceed the portion of the amount paid which is 
                        equivalent to the largest employer contribution 
                        made on behalf of any such employee for 
                        coverage under a certified standard health 
                        plan.
                            ``(ii) Equivalent contribution.--For 
                        purposes of clause (i), the amount paid is 
                        equivalent to a contribution if--
                                    ``(I) it is the same dollar amount 
                                as the contribution,
                                    ``(II) it represents the same 
                                percentage of cost under the plan to 
                                which it is made as does the 
                                contribution, or
                                    ``(III) it represents the same 
                                percentage of the weighted average 
                                premium for the class of enrollment (as 
                                defined in section 1113(c) of the 
                                Health Security Act) for the community 
                                rating area in which the employee works 
                                as does the contribution.
                        For purposes of applying subclause (II) or 
                        (III), any dollar limitation applicable to all 
                        employer contributions (whether expressed as a 
                        dollar amount or a percentage described in 
                        subclause (III)) shall be disregarded.
                    ``(B) Deduction limited to earned income.--No 
                deduction shall be allowed under paragraph (1) to the 
                extent that the amount of such deduction exceeds the 
                taxpayer's earned income (within the meaning of section 
                401(c)).
                    ``(C) Other coverage.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
                apply to any taxpayer for any calendar month for which 
                the taxpayer is eligible to participate in any 
                subsidized health plan maintained by any employer of 
                the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse.''
            (2) Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
        162(l)(5) is amended by striking ``shall be treated as such 
        individual's earned income'' and inserting ``shall be included 
        in such individual's earned income''.
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.

SEC. 7204. LIMITATION ON PREPAYMENT OF MEDICAL INSURANCE PREMIUMS.

    (a) General Rule.--Subsection (d) of section 213 is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(10) Limitation on prepayments.--If--
                    ``(A) the taxpayer pays a premium or other amount 
                which constitutes medical care under paragraph (1), and
                    ``(B) such premium or other amount is properly 
                allocable to insurance coverage or care to be provided 
                during periods more than 12 months after the month in 
                which such payment is made,
        such premium or other amount shall be treated as paid ratably 
        over the period during which such insurance coverage or care is 
        to be provided. The preceding sentence shall not apply to any 
        premium to which paragraph (7) applies.''
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to amounts paid after December 31, 1994.

          PART 2--VOLUNTARY EMPLOYER HEALTH CARE CONTRIBUTIONS

SEC. 7111. TAX TREATMENT OF VOLUNTARY EMPLOYER HEALTH CARE 
              CONTRIBUTIONS.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 37 (relating to health-related taxes), as 
added by section 7111, is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subchapter:

      ``Subchapter B--Voluntary Employer-Provided Health Benefits

                              ``Sec. 4521. Taxable employer-provided 
                                        health benefits.
                              ``Sec. 4522. Discriminatory employer 
                                        practices.
                              ``Sec. 4523. Exceptions.
                              ``Sec. 4524. Definitions and special 
                                        rules.

``SEC. 4521. TAXABLE EMPLOYER-PROVIDED HEALTH BENEFITS.

    ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed a tax equal to 
the product of--
            ``(1) the sum of--
                    ``(A) the taxable employer contributions for any 
                taxable year, plus
                    ``(B) the aggregate employer contributions for 
                permitted coverage described in subparagraph (A) or (B) 
                of subsection (b)(2) during any portion of the taxable 
                year during which there is discriminatory permitted 
                coverage, and
            ``(2) the highest rate of tax imposed under section 11(b) 
        for the taxable year.
    ``(b) Taxable Employer Contribution.--For purposes of this 
section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `taxable employer contribution' 
        means any employer contribution under an accident or health 
        plan for coverage of an employee other than permitted coverage.
            ``(2) Permitted coverage.--For purposes of this subsection, 
        the term `permitted coverage' means--
                    ``(A) coverage under a certified standard health 
                plan (as defined in section 1011(2)(A) of the Health 
                Security Act),
                    ``(B) coverage under a certified supplemental 
                health benefit plan (as defined in section 1011(3)(A) 
                of such Act), except that this subparagraph shall not 
                apply to coverage of any employee who is covered under 
                a certified standard health plan which provides the 
                alternative standard benefits package described in 
                subtitle C of title I of such Act,
                    ``(C) coverage under a qualified long-term care 
                insurance policy (as defined in section 7702B(b)),
                    ``(D) coverage providing wages or payments in lieu 
                of wages for any period during which the employee is 
                absent from work on account of sickness or injury,
                    ``(E) coverage only for accidental death or 
                dismemberment,
                    ``(F) coverage under a medicare supplemental policy 
                (as defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social 
                Security Act), and
                    ``(G) coverage under an equivalent health care 
                program (as defined in section 1013(3) of the Health 
                Security Act).
    ``(c) Discriminatory Permitted Coverage.--For purposes of this 
section, the term `discriminatory permitted coverage' means, with 
respect to any period, coverage--
            ``(1) which is permitted coverage described in subparagraph 
        (A) or (B) of subsection (b)(2), and
            ``(2) with respect to which the requirements of subsection 
        (a) or (b) of section 4522 are not met during such period.

``SEC. 4522. DISCRIMINATORY EMPLOYER PRACTICES.

    ``(a) Health Status Requirements.--For purposes of section 4521(c), 
an employer meets the requirements of this subsection if, with respect 
to coverage described in such section--
            ``(1) there is no waiting period or denial of coverage with 
        respect to an employee, and
            ``(2) the amount of the employer contribution on behalf of 
        an employee is not conditioned, and does not vary,
by reason of the employee's health status, claims experience, medical 
history, receipt of health care, or lack of evidence of insurability.
    ``(b) Uniform Contribution Requirements.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 4521(c), an 
        employer meets the requirements of this subsection if the 
        employer contribution on behalf of an employee for coverage 
        described in such section is equivalent to each employer 
        contribution on behalf of all other employees who elect such 
        coverage under plans offered by the employer.
            ``(2) Equivalent contribution.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), a contribution is equivalent to any other contribution 
        if--
                    ``(A) it is the same dollar amount as the other 
                contribution,
                    ``(B) it represents the same percentage of cost 
                under the plan to which it is made as does the other 
                contribution, or
                    ``(C) it represents the same percentage of the 
                weighted average premium for the class of enrollment 
                (as defined in section 1113(c) of the Health Security 
                Act) for the community rating area in which the 
                employee works as does the other contribution.
        For purposes of applying subparagraph (B) or (C), any dollar 
        limitation applicable to all employer contributions (whether 
        expressed as a dollar amount or a percentage described in 
        subparagraph (C)) shall be disregarded.
            ``(3) Excluded employees.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The following employees of an 
                employer shall be excluded from consideration under 
                this subsection:
                            ``(i) Any employee before the employee has 
                        completed 6 months of service with the 
                        employer.
                            ``(ii) Any employee who normally works less 
                        than 24 hours per week.
                            ``(iii) Any employee who normally works 
                        during not more than 6 months of any year.
                            ``(iv) Any employee who has not attained 
                        age 18.
                            ``(v) Any employee who is included in a 
                        unit of employees covered by an agreement which 
                        the Secretary finds to be a collective 
                        bargaining agreement between employee 
                        representatives and 1 or more employers if 
                        there is evidence that employer-provided 
                        benefits for standard health benefits coverage 
                        was the subject of good faith bargaining 
                        between the employee representatives and 
                        employer or employers.
                            ``(vi) Any employee who is a nonresident 
                        alien and who receives no earned income (within 
                        the meaning of section 911(d)(2)) from the 
                        employer which constitutes income from sources 
                        within the United States (within the meaning of 
                        section 861(a)(3)).
                            ``(vii) Any former employee.
                    ``(B) Coverage of part-time employees.--
                            ``(i) In general.--If an employer makes an 
                        employer contribution for any period for 
                        coverage described in section 4521(c) for any 
                        employee who normally works at least 10 hours 
                        but less than 24 hours per week, subparagraph 
                        (A)(ii) shall be applied by substituting `10 
                        hours' for `24 hours'.
                            ``(ii) Requirements may be met 
                        separately.--If an employer elects the 
                        application of this clause--
                                    ``(I) the requirements of this 
                                subsection shall be applied separately 
                                to employees to whom this subsection 
                                applies by reason of clause (i), and
                                    ``(II) such employees shall be 
                                excluded in determining whether such 
                                requirements are met with respect to 
                                any other employees.
                            ``(iii) Pro rata contributions 
                        permissible.--For purposes of this subsection, 
                        contributions on behalf of any employee to 
                        which this subsection applies by reason of 
                        clause (i) shall not fail to be treated as 
                        equivalent solely because they are 
                        proportionate to the number of hours the 
                        employee works.
            ``(4) Aggregation rules.--For purposes of this subsection--
                    ``(A) In general.--All employers treated as a 
                single employer under subsection (b) or (c) of section 
                414 shall be treated as a single employer.
                    ``(B) Affiliated service groups.--All employees of 
                members of an affiliated service group (as defined in 
                section 414(m)) shall be treated as employed by a 
                single employer.
            ``(5) Separate lines of business.--If, under section 
        414(r), an employer is treated as operating separate lines of 
        business for a year, the employer may apply this subsection 
        separately to employees in each separate line of business.

``SEC. 4523. EXCEPTIONS.

    ``(a) Exception for Reasonable Diligence.--No tax shall be imposed 
by this subchapter during any period for which it is established to the 
satisfaction of the Secretary that the employer did not know, or 
exercising reasonable diligence would not have known, that the employer 
had taken any action subject to tax under this subchapter.
    ``(b) Corrections Within 30 Days.--No tax shall be imposed by this 
subchapter with respect to any action subject to tax under this 
subchapter if--
            ``(1) such action was due to reasonable cause and not to 
        willful neglect, and
            ``(2) such action is corrected during the 30-day period 
        beginning on the 1st date the employer knew, or exercising 
        reasonable diligence would have known, that such action was 
        subject to such tax.
    ``(c) Waiver by Secretary.--In the case of any action subject to 
tax under this subchapter which is due to reasonable cause and not to 
willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of any tax imposed 
by this subchapter to the extent that the payment of such tax would be 
excessive relative to the action involved.

``SEC. 4524. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.

    ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this subchapter--
            ``(1) Employer.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The term `employer' means any 
                person or governmental entity for whom an individual 
                performs services, of whatever nature, as an employee 
                (as defined in section 3401(c)).
                    ``(B) Special rules.--
                            ``(i) A partnership shall be treated as the 
                        employer of each partner who is an employee 
                        within the meaning of section 401(c)(1).
                            ``(ii) An S corporation shall be treated as 
                        the employer of each shareholder who is an 
                        employee within the meaning of section 
                        401(c)(1).
            ``(2) Employer contributions.--The term `employer 
        contribution' means, with respect to coverage under a health 
        plan, a reasonable estimate of the portion of the cost of the 
        coverage which is to be provided by the employer.
    ``(b) Liability for Tax.--Any tax imposed by this subchapter shall 
be paid by the employer.
    ``(c) Taxes To Apply to Governmental and Other Tax-Exempt 
Entities.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or rule of law, 
none of the following shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this 
subchapter:
            ``(1) The United States, any State or political subdivision 
        thereof, the District of Columbia, and any agency or 
        instrumentality of any of the foregoing.
            ``(2) Any other entity otherwise exempt from tax under 
        chapter 1.
    ``(d) No Cover Over to Possessions.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, no amount collected under this subchapter shall be 
covered over to any possession of the United States.
    ``(e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, 
including regulations providing for the determination of the amount of 
any employer contribution, the aggregation of governmental and tax-
exempt entities, and the prevention of the avoidance of any tax imposed 
by this subchapter through the use of any arrangement described in 
section 414(o).''
    (b) Employee Leasing.--Paragraph (3) of section 414(n) is amended 
by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the 
period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(D) subchapter B of chapter 37.''
    (c) Tax Not Deductible.--Section 275(a) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
            ``(7) The taxes imposed by section 4521 (relating to 
        taxable employer-provided health benefits).''
    (d) Conforming Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 37 
is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

                              ``Subchapter B. Voluntary employer-
                                        provided health benefits.''
    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1996.

              Subtitle C--Exempt Health Care Organizations

                       PART 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 7301. QUALIFICATION AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR NONPROFIT 
              HEALTH CARE ORGANIZATIONS.

    (a) Treatment of Hospitals and Other Entities Providing Health Care 
Services.--Section 501 (relating to exemption from tax on corporations, 
certain trusts, etc.) is amended by redesignating subsection (n) as 
subsection (o) and by inserting after subsection (m) the following new 
subsection:
    ``(n) Qualification of Health Care Organizations as Exempt 
Organizations.--
            ``(1) In general.--An organization which is described in 
        paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (c) and the predominant 
        activity of which is the provision of health care services 
        shall be exempt from tax under subsection (a) only if--
                    ``(A) such organization, with the participation of 
                community representatives, annually--
                            ``(i) assesses its community's needs for 
                        health care services and qualified outreach 
                        services, and
                            ``(ii) prepares a written plan to meet 
                        those needs,
                    ``(B) pursuant to such plan, such organization 
                provides (directly or indirectly) significant qualified 
                outreach services,
                    ``(C) such organization does not discriminate 
                against individuals in the provision of health care 
                services on the basis of participation in a government-
                sponsored health plan, and
                    ``(D) such organization does not discriminate 
                against individuals in the provision of emergency 
                health care services on the basis of ability to pay.
            ``(2) Special rule for health maintenance organizations.--A 
        health maintenance organization shall not be treated as 
        described in subsection (c)(3) unless substantially all of its 
        primary care health services are provided as described in 
        subsection (m)(6)(A).
            ``(3) Definitions and special rule.--For purposes of this 
        subsection--
                    ``(A) Qualified outreach services.--The term 
                `qualified outreach services' means health care 
                services (or preventive care, educational, or social 
                services programs related thereto) which are provided--
                            ``(i) in 1 or more medically underserved 
                        areas,
                            ``(ii) at below cost to individuals who are 
                        otherwise unable to afford such services, or
                            ``(iii) at emergency care facilities which 
                        provide specialty services and which normally 
                        operate at a loss.
                Such term shall not include insurance described in 
                subparagraph (B)(iii) unless such insurance is provided 
                on a subsidized basis.
                    ``(B) Health care services.--The term `health care 
                services' means--
                            ``(i) any activity which consists of 
                        providing medical care (as defined in section 
                        213(d)(1)(A)) to individuals,
                            ``(ii) in the case of an organization 
                        described in subsection (c)(3), any activity 
                        which is treated as accomplishing an exempt 
                        purpose of the organization solely because it 
                        is carried on as part of an activity described 
                        in clause (i), and
                            ``(iii) insurance (other than commercial-
                        type insurance, as defined in subsection (m)) 
                        for the activities described in clauses (i) and 
                        (ii).
                    ``(C) Medically underserved area.--The term 
                `medically underserved area' means, with respect to a 
                health care service, any area reasonably determined by 
                the organization (in a manner not inconsistent with 
                regulations prescribed by the Secretary) to have--
                            ``(i) a shortage (relative to the number of 
                        individuals needing such service) of health 
                        professionals performing such service, or
                            ``(ii) a population group experiencing such 
                        a shortage.
                Such term includes a health professional shortage area 
                (as defined in section 332 of the Public Health Service 
                Act).
            ``(4) Exceptions.--This subsection shall not apply to any 
        organization which--
                    ``(A) demonstrates, in a manner not inconsistent 
                with regulations prescribed by the Secretary, that one 
                of its principal purposes is academic training or 
                medical research, or
                    ``(B) provides health care services exclusively on 
                an uncompensated basis, regardless of ability to pay.
            ``(5) Disallowance of charitable deductions.--No gift or 
        bequest to an organization which is not exempt from tax by 
        reason of this subsection shall be allowed as a deduction under 
        section 170, 545(b)(2), 556(b)(2), 642(c), 2055, 2106(a)(2), or 
        2522.
            ``(6) Requirements supplement other requirements.--The 
        requirements of this subsection are in addition to, and not in 
        lieu of, the requirements otherwise applicable to an 
        organization described in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection 
        (c).''
    (b) Reporting and Disclosure of Needs Assessment and Plan.--
            (1) Reporting.--
                    (A) Organizations described in section 501(c)(3).--
                Subsection (b) of section 6033 (relating to certain 
                organizations described in section 501(c)(3)) is 
                amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
                (9), by redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (12), 
                and by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new 
                paragraphs:
            ``(10) in the case of an organization which prepares a plan 
        described in section 501(n)(1)(A) (relating to community 
        needs)--
                    ``(A) a copy of such plan for the year, and
                    ``(B) information on the implementation of such 
                plan for the year (including unrecovered costs and 
                revenues foregone in furtherance of such plan),
            ``(11) such information as the Secretary may require with 
        respect to any taxable inurement (as defined in section 
        4958(d)), and''.
                    (B) Organizations described in section 501(c)(4).--
                Section 6033 is amended by redesignating subsection (f) 
                as subsection (g) and by inserting after subsection (e) 
                the following new subsection:
    ``(f) Certain Organizations Described in Section 501(c)(4).--Every 
organization described in section 501(c)(4) which is subject to the 
requirements of subsection (a) and which prepares a plan described in 
section 501(n)(1)(A) (relating to community needs) for the year--
            ``(1) shall include a copy of such plan with the return 
        required under subsection (a) for the year, and
            ``(2) shall include on such return the information referred 
        to in paragraphs (10)(B) and (11) of subsection (b) with 
        respect to such organization.''
            (2) Disclosure.--
                    (A) In general.--Subsection (e) of section 6104 
                (relating to public inspection of certain annual 
                returns and applications for exemption) is amended by 
                adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(3) Community health care needs assessment and plan.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Every organization which is 
                required to prepare a plan described in section 
                501(n)(1)(A) (relating to community needs)--
                            ``(i) shall make a copy of such plan (and 
                        the assessment on which such plan is based) 
                        available for inspection during regular 
                        business hours by any individual at the 
                        principal office of such organization and, if 
                        such organization regularly maintains 1 or more 
                        regional or district offices having 3 or more 
                        employees, at each such regional or district 
                        office, and
                            ``(ii) upon request of an individual made 
                        at such principal office or such a regional or 
                        district office, shall provide--
                                    ``(I) a copy of such plan (and 
                                assessment), and
                                    ``(II) a copy of the annual return 
                                filed under section 6033,
                        to such individual without charge other than a 
                        reasonable fee for any reproduction and mailing 
                        costs.
                If the request under clause (ii) is made in person, 
                such copies shall be provided immediately and, if made 
                other than in person, shall be provided within 30 days.
                    ``(B) Period of availability.--Subparagraph (A) 
                shall apply--
                            ``(i) with respect to any plan (and 
                        assessment) during the 3-year period after the 
                        close of the year for which such plan is 
                        prepared, and
                            ``(ii) with respect to any return, during 
                        the 3-year period beginning on the filing date 
                        (as defined in paragraph (1)(D)).
                    ``(C) Limitation.--Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not 
                apply to any request if the Secretary determines, upon 
                application by an organization, that such request is 
                part of a harassment campaign and that compliance with 
                such request is not in the public interest.''
                    (B) Technical amendment.--The heading for 
                subsection (e) of section 6104 is amended by striking 
                ``and Applications for Exemption'' and inserting ``, 
                Applications for Exemption, and Community Needs 
                Assessment and Plan for Health and Outreach Services''.
    (c) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 
        1995.
            (2) HMO service requirement.--So much of the amendments 
        made by this section as relates to section 501(n)(2) of the 
        Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section, shall 
        take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 7302. EXCISE TAXES FOR PRIVATE INUREMENT BY TAX-EXEMPT HEALTH CARE 
              ORGANIZATIONS.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 42 (relating to private foundations and 
certain other tax-exempt organizations) is amended by redesignating 
subchapter D as subchapter E and by inserting after subchapter C the 
following new subchapter:

      ``Subchapter D--Private Inurement by Tax-Exempt Health Care 
                             Organizations

                              ``Sec. 4958. Taxes on private inurement.
                              ``Sec. 4959. Other definitions.

``SEC. 4958. TAXES ON PRIVATE INUREMENT.

    ``(a) Initial Taxes.--
            ``(1) On the beneficiary.--There is hereby imposed on any 
        taxable inurement a tax equal to 25 percent of the amount 
        thereof. The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any 
        beneficiary of such inurement.
            ``(2) On the management.--In any case in which there is a 
        tax imposed by paragraph (1), there is hereby imposed on the 
        participation of any organization manager of an organization in 
        any taxable inurement which occurs with respect to such 
        organization, knowing that it is taxable inurement, a tax equal 
        to 2\1/2\ percent of the amount thereof, unless such 
        participation is not willful and is due to reasonable cause. 
        The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any 
        organization manager who participated in the taxable inurement.
    ``(b) Additional Taxes.--
            ``(1) On the beneficiary.--In any case in which an initial 
        tax is imposed by subsection (a)(1) on any taxable inurement 
        and such inurement is not corrected within the taxable period, 
        there is hereby imposed a tax equal to 200 percent of the 
        amount of the taxable inurement. The tax imposed by this 
        paragraph shall be paid by any beneficiary of such inurement.
            ``(2) On the management.--In any case in which an 
        additional tax is imposed by paragraph (1), if an organization 
        manager refused to agree to part or all of the correction, 
        there is hereby imposed a tax equal to 50 percent of the amount 
        of the taxable inurement. The tax imposed by this paragraph 
        shall be paid by any organization manager who refused to agree 
        to part or all of the correction.
    ``(c) Special Rules Relating to Liability for Tax.--For purposes of 
this section--
            ``(1) Joint and several liability.--If more than one person 
        is liable under any paragraph of subsection (a) or (b) with 
        respect to any one taxable inurement, all such persons shall be 
        jointly and severally liable under such paragraph with respect 
        to such inurement.
            ``(2) Limit for management.--With respect to any 1 taxable 
        inurement, the maximum amount of the tax imposed by subsection 
        (a)(2) shall not exceed $10,000, and the maximum amount of the 
        tax imposed by subsection (b)(2) shall not exceed $10,000.
    ``(d) Taxable Inurement.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`taxable inurement' means any inurement not permitted under paragraph 
(3) or (4) of section 501(c), as the case may be, in a transaction 
involving an applicable tax-exempt health care organization in which--
            ``(1) the value of any economic benefit provided to or for 
        the use of a disqualified person exceeds the value of the 
        consideration (including the performance of services) received 
        by the organization for providing such benefit, or
            ``(2) the amount of any economic benefit provided to or for 
        the use of a disqualified person is determined in whole or in 
        part by the gross or net revenues of 1 or more activities of 
        the organization.
The amount of any taxable inurement with respect to any such 
transaction shall be the excess described in paragraph (1) or the 
amount described in paragraph (2). For purposes of paragraph (1), an 
economic benefit shall not be treated as provided as consideration for 
the performance of services unless the organization clearly indicated 
its intent to so treat such benefit.
    ``(e) Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Disqualified person.--The term `disqualified person' 
        means, with respect to any transaction--
                    ``(A) any person who was, at any time during the 5-
                year period ending on the date of such transaction--
                            ``(i) an organization manager, or
                            ``(ii) an individual (other than an 
                        organization manager)--
                                    ``(I) in a position to exercise 
                                substantial influence over the affairs 
                                of the organization, or
                                    ``(II) performing substantial 
                                medical services as a physician 
                                pursuant to an employment or other 
                                contractual relationship with the 
                                organization or a related organization,
                    ``(B) a member of the family of an individual 
                described in subparagraph (A), and
                    ``(C) a 35-percent controlled entity.
            ``(2) Organization manager.--The term `organization 
        manager' means, with respect to any applicable tax-exempt 
        health care organization, any officer, director, or trustee of 
        such organization (or any individual having powers or 
        responsibilities similar to those of officers, directors, or 
        trustees of the organization).
            ``(3) 35-percent controlled entity.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The term `35-percent controlled 
                entity' means--
                            ``(i) a corporation in which persons 
                        described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of 
                        paragraph (1) own more than 35 percent of the 
                        total combined voting power,
                            ``(ii) a partnership in which such persons 
                        own more than 35 percent of the profits 
                        interest, and
                            ``(iii) a trust or estate in which such 
                        persons own more than 35 percent of the 
                        beneficial interest.
                    ``(B) Constructive ownership rules.--Rules similar 
                to the rules of paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 
                4946(a) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
            ``(4) Family members.--The members of an individual's 
        family shall be determined under section 4946(d); except that 
        such members also shall include the brothers and sisters 
        (whether by the whole or halfblood) of the individual and their 
        spouses.
    ``(f) Treatment of Previously Exempt Organizations.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the status 
        of any organization as an applicable tax-exempt health care 
        organization shall be terminated only if--
                    ``(A)(i) such organization notifies the Secretary 
                (at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may 
                by regulations prescribe) of its intent to accomplish 
                such termination, or
                    ``(ii) there is a final determination by the 
                Secretary that such status has terminated, and
                    ``(B)(i) such organization pays the tax imposed by 
                paragraph (2) (or any portion not abated pursuant to 
                paragraph (3)), or
                    ``(ii) the entire amount of such tax is abated 
                pursuant to paragraph (3).
            ``(2) Imposition of tax.--There is hereby imposed on each 
        organization referred to in paragraph (1) a tax equal to the 
        lesser of--
                    ``(A) the amount which the organization 
                substantiates by adequate records or other 
                corroborating evidence as the aggregate tax benefit 
                resulting from its exemption from tax under section 
                501(a), or
                    ``(B) the value of the net assets of such 
                organization.
            ``(3) Abatement of tax.--The Secretary may abate the unpaid 
        portion of the assessment of any tax imposed by paragraph (2), 
        or any liability in respect thereof, if the applicable tax-
        exempt health care organization distributes all of its net 
        assets to 1 or more organizations each of which has been in 
        existence, and described in section 501(c)(3), for a continuous 
        period of at least 60 calendar months. If the distributing 
        organization is described in section 501(c)(4), the preceding 
        sentence shall be applied by treating the reference to section 
        501(c)(3) as including a reference to section 501(c)(4).
            ``(4) Certain rules made applicable.--Rules similar to the 
        rules of subsections (d), (e), and (f) of section 507 shall 
        apply for purposes of this subsection.

``SEC. 4959. OTHER DEFINITIONS.

    ``(a) Applicable Tax-Exempt Health Care Organization.--For purposes 
of this subchapter, the term `applicable tax-exempt health care 
organization' means any organization--
            ``(1) the predominant activity of which is the provision of 
        health care services (as defined in section 501(n)(3)), and
            ``(2) which (without regard to any taxable inurement) would 
        be described in paragraph (3) or (4) of section 501(c) and 
        exempt from tax under section 501(a).
Such term does not include a private foundation (as defined in section 
509(a)).
    ``(b) Taxable Period; Correction.--For purposes of this 
subchapter--
            ``(1) Taxable period.--The term `taxable period' means, 
        with respect to any taxable inurement, the period beginning 
        with the date on which the inurement occurs and ending on the 
        earliest of--
                    ``(A) the date of mailing a notice of deficiency 
                under section 6212 with respect to the tax imposed by 
                subsection (a)(1) of section 4958, or
                    ``(B) the date on which the tax imposed by such 
                subsection (a)(1) is assessed.
            ``(2) Correction.--The terms `correction' and `correct' 
        mean, with respect to any taxable inurement, undoing the 
        inurement to the extent possible, establishing safeguards to 
        prevent future such inurement, and where fully undoing the 
        inurement is not possible, such additional corrective action as 
        is prescribed by the Secretary by regulations.''
    (b) Application of Private Inurement Rule to Tax-Exempt Health Care 
Organizations Described in Section 501(c)(4).--Paragraph (4) of section 
501(c) is amended by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(4)'' and by adding at 
the end the following:
            ``(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to an entity the 
        predominant activity of which is the provision of health care 
        services (as defined in subsection (n)(3)) unless no part of 
        the net earnings of such entity inures to the benefit of any 
        private shareholder or individual.''
    (c) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Subsection (e) of section 4955 is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``Section 4945'' in the heading and 
                inserting ``Sections 4945 and 4958'', and
                    (B) by inserting before the period ``or a taxable 
                inurement for purposes of section 4958''.
            (2) Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 4963 are each 
        amended by inserting ``4958,'' after ``4955,''.
            (3) Subsection (e) of section 6213 is amended by inserting 
        ``4958 (relating to private inurement),'' before ``4971''.
            (4) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 7422(g) are each 
        amended by inserting ``4958,'' after ``4955,''.
            (5) Subsection (b) of section 7454 is amended by inserting 
        ``or whether an organization manager (as defined in section 
        4958(f)) has `knowingly' participated in taxable inurement (as 
        defined in section 4958(d)),'' after ``section 4912(b),''.
            (6) The table of subchapters for chapter 42 is amended by 
        striking the last item and inserting the following:

                              ``Subchapter D. Private inurement by tax-
                                        exempt health care 
                                        organizations.
                              ``Subchapter E. Abatement of first and 
                                        second tier taxes in certain 
                                        cases.''
    (d) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        amendments made by this section shall apply to inurement 
        occurring on or after June 30, 1994.
            (2) Application of binding contract rule to tax-exempt 
        health care organizations described in section 501(c)(4).--The 
        amendments made by this section shall not apply to any 
        inurement involving an organization described in section 
        501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 occurring before 
        July 1, 1996, pursuant to a written contract which was binding 
        on June 29, 1994, and at all times thereafter before such 
        inurement occurred.

SEC. 7303. TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS, PARENT 
              ORGANIZATIONS, AND HEALTH INSURANCE PURCHASING 
              COOPERATIVES.

    (a) Insurance Provided by Health Maintenance Organizations.--
            (1) In general.--Section 501(m) (relating to certain 
        organizations providing commercial-type insurance not exempt 
        from tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(6) Certain activities provided by health maintenance 
        organizations not treated as commercial-type insurance.--For 
        purposes of this subsection, the provision of (or the arranging 
        for the provision of) medical care on a prepaid basis by a 
        health maintenance organization shall not be treated as 
        providing commercial-type insurance if (and only if) such care 
        is--
                    ``(A) care provided by such organization to its 
                members at its own facilities through health care 
                professionals who do not provide substantial health 
                care services other than on behalf of such 
                organization,
                    ``(B) care provided by a health care professional 
                to a member of such organization on a basis under which 
                substantially all of the risks of the rates of 
                utilization is assumed by the provider of such care,
                    ``(C) care (other than primary care) provided to a 
                member of such organization pursuant to a referral by 
                such organization, or
                    ``(D) emergency care provided to a member of such 
                organization at a location outside such member's area 
                of residence.''
            (2) Technical amendments.--
                    (A) Paragraph (3) of section 501(m) is amended by 
                striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating 
                subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) as subparagraphs (B), 
                (C), and (D), respectively.
                    (B) Paragraph (5) of section 501(m) is amended by 
                striking ``paragraph (3)(E)'' and inserting ``paragraph 
                (3)(D)''.
    (b) Treatment of Parent Organizations of Health Care Providers.--
Section 509(a) (defining private foundation) is amended by striking 
``and'' at the end of paragraph (3), by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
paragraph (5), and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
paragraph:
            ``(4) an organization which is organized and operated for 
        the benefit of, and which directly or indirectly controls, an 
        organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(iii), and''.
    (c) Purchasing Cooperatives Exempt From Tax.--
            (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 501 (relating to 
        exemption from tax on corporations, certain trusts, etc.) is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(26)(A) Any health insurance purchasing cooperative 
        described in section 1013(12) of the Health Security Act.
            ``(B) Such a cooperative shall not be exempt from tax 
        pursuant to any provision other than this paragraph.
            ``(C) Such a cooperative shall not be exempt from tax 
        unless--
                    ``(i) no part of the net earnings of such 
                cooperative inures to the benefit of any private 
                shareholder or individual,
                    ``(ii) no substantial part of the activities of 
                such cooperative is carrying on propaganda, or 
                otherwise attempting, to influence legislation (except 
                as otherwise provided in subsection (h)), and
                    ``(iii) such cooperative does not participate in, 
                or intervene in (including the publishing or 
                distributing of statements), any political campaign on 
                behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for 
                public office.''
            (2) Certain provisions applicable to organizations 
        described in section 501(c)(3) made applicable to purchasing 
        cooperatives.--Section 501 is amended by redesignating 
        subsection (o) as subsection (p) and by inserting after 
        subsection (n) the following new subsection:
    ``(o) Certain Provisions Made Applicable to Health Insurance 
Purchasing Cooperatives.--A health insurance purchasing cooperative 
described in subsection (c)(26) shall be treated--
            ``(1) as described in subsection (c)(3) for purposes of 
        applying subsection (h) (relating to expenditures by public 
        charities to influence legislation), section 4955 (relating to 
        taxes on political expenditures of section 501(c)(3) 
        organizations), and section 4958 (relating to private 
        inurement), and
            ``(2) as described in subsection (h)(4).''
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 7304. TAX TREATMENT OF TAXABLE ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDING HEALTH 
              INSURANCE AND OTHER PREPAID HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

    (a) General Rule.--Section 831 is amended by redesignating 
subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) 
the following new subsection:
    ``(c) Treatment of Organizations Providing Health Insurance and 
Other Prepaid Health Care Services.--
            ``(1) General rule.--Any organization to which this 
        subsection applies shall be taxable under this part in the same 
        manner as if it were an insurance company other than a life 
        insurance company.
            ``(2) Organizations to which subsection applies.--This 
        subsection shall apply to any organization--
                    ``(A) which is not exempt from taxation under this 
                subtitle,
                    ``(B) which is not taxable as a life insurance 
                company under part I of this subchapter, and
                    ``(C) the primary and predominant business activity 
                of which during the taxable year consists of 1 or more 
                of the following:
                            ``(i) Issuing accident and health insurance 
                        contracts or the reinsuring of risks undertaken 
                        by other insurance companies under such 
                        contracts.
                            ``(ii) Operating as a health maintenance 
                        organization.
                            ``(iii) Entering into arrangements under 
                        which--
                                    ``(I) fixed payments or premiums 
                                are received as consideration for the 
                                organization's agreement to provide or 
                                arrange for the provision of health 
                                care services, regardless of how the 
                                health care services are provided or 
                                arranged to be provided, and
                                    ``(II) substantially all of the 
                                risks of the rates of utilization of 
                                such services is assumed by such 
                                organization or the provider of such 
                                services.
        In the case of an organization which has as a material business 
        activity the issuing of accident and health insurance contracts 
        or the reinsuring of risks undertaken by other insurance 
        companies under such contracts, the administering of accident 
        and health insurance contracts by such organization shall be 
        treated as part of such business activity for purposes of 
        subparagraph (C)(i).''
    (b) Effective Date.--
            (1) In general.--The amendment made by this section shall 
        apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
            (2) Transitional rules.--
                    (A) Organizations to which paragraph applies.--This 
                paragraph shall apply to any organization to which 
                section 831(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as 
                added by subsection (a)) applies for such 
                organization's first taxable year beginning after 
                December 31, 1994; except that this paragraph shall not 
                apply if such organization treated itself as an 
                insurance company taxable under part II of subchapter L 
                of chapter 1 of such Code on its original Federal 
                income tax return for its taxable year beginning in 
                1992 and for all of its taxable years thereafter 
                beginning before January 1, 1995.
                    (B) Treatment of currently taxable companies.--
                Except as provided in regulations prescribed by the 
                Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate, in the case 
                of any organization to which this paragraph applies--
                            (i) the amendments made by this section 
                        shall be treated as a change in the method of 
                        accounting, and
                            (ii) all adjustments required to be taken 
                        into account under section 481 of the Internal 
                        Revenue Code of 1986 shall be taken into 
                        account for such company's first taxable year 
                        beginning after December 31, 1994.
                    (C) Treatment of currently tax-exempt companies.--
                Except as provided in regulations prescribed by the 
                Secretary of the Treasury or his delegates, in the case 
                of any organization to which this paragraph applies and 
                which was exempt from tax under chapter 1 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for such organization's 
                last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1995--
                            (i) no adjustment shall be made under 
                        section 481 (or any other provision) of such 
                        Code on account of a change in its method of 
                        accounting required by this section for its 
                        first taxable year beginning after December 31, 
                        1994, and
                            (ii) for purposes of determining gain or 
                        loss, the adjusted basis of any asset held by 
                        such organization on the first day of such 
                        taxable year shall be treated as equal to its 
                        fair market value as of such day.

SEC. 7305. REPEAL OF SECTION 833.

    (a) Repeal of Section 833.--
            (1) In general.--Section 833 (relating to treatment of Blue 
        Cross and Blue Shield and similar organizations) is hereby 
        repealed.
            (2) Conforming amendments.--
                    (A) Section 56(c) is amended by striking paragraph 
                (3).
                    (B) The table of sections for part II of subchapter 
                L of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating 
                to section 833.
    (b) Application of Section 833 Prior to Repeal.--
            (1) In general.--Section 833(c) (relating to organization 
        to which section applies) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new paragraph:
            ``(4) Treatment as existing blue cross or blue shield 
        organization.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (2) shall be applied 
                to an organization described in subparagraph (B) as if 
                it were a Blue Cross or Blue Shield organization.
                    ``(B) Applicable organization.--An organization is 
                described in this subparagraph if it--
                            ``(i) is organized and governed by State 
                        laws which are specifically and exclusively 
                        applicable to not-for-profit insurance or 
                        health-service type organizations, and
                            ``(ii) is not a Blue Cross or Blue Shield 
                        organization or health maintenance 
                        organization.''
            (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this section 
        shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986.
    (c) Effective Date of Repeal.--
            (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
        subsection, the amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply 
        to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
            (2) Transition rules for blue cross and blue shield and 
        similar organizations.--
                    (A) Prior fresh start preserved.--The adjusted 
                basis of any asset determined under section 
                1012(c)(3)(A)(ii) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 shall 
                not be affected by the amendments made by this section.
                    (B) Recoupment of prior reserve benefit.--In the 
                case of any organization entitled to the benefits of 
                section 833(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
                (as in effect after the amendment made by subsection 
                (a)) for such organization's last taxable year 
                beginning before January 1, 1997, the amount determined 
                under paragraph (4) of section 832(b) of such Code for 
                each of such organization's first 6 taxable years 
                beginning after December 31, 1996, shall be increased 
                by an amount equal to 3\1/3\ percent of its unearned 
                premiums on outstanding business as of the close of 
                such organization's last taxable year beginning before 
                January 1, 1997.

SEC. 7306. TAX EXEMPTION FOR HIGH-RISK INSURANCE POOLS.

    Subsection (c) of section 501 (relating to list of exempt 
organizations) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
    ``(27)(A) In the case of taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1989, and before January 1, 1997, a qualified high risk health 
insurance pool.
    ``(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified high 
risk health insurance pool' means an entity--
            ``(i) which was established by a State or political 
        subdivision thereof to provide health insurance on a nonprofit 
        basis to persons unable to obtain health insurance because of 
        health conditions,
            ``(ii) with respect to which the State or political 
        subdivision--
                    ``(I) participates in the ongoing governance of the 
                entity, and
                    ``(II) subsidizes the operation of the entity, and
            ``(iii) no part of the net earnings of which inure to the 
        benefit of any private shareholder, member, or individual.''

            PART 2--TAX TREATMENT OF SECTION 501(c)(3) BONDS

SEC. 748. TAX TREATMENT OF 501(C)(3) BONDS SIMILAR TO GOVERNMENTAL 
              BONDS.

    (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 150 (relating to 
definitions and special rules) is amended by striking paragraphs (2) 
and (4), by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs (4) and 
(5), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following 
new paragraph:
            ``(2) Exempt person.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The term `exempt person' means--
                            ``(i) a governmental unit, or
                            ``(ii) a 501(c)(3) organization, but only 
                        with respect to its activities which do not 
                        constitute unrelated trades or businesses as 
                        determined by applying section 513(a).
                    ``(B) Governmental unit not to include federal 
                government.--The term `governmental unit' does not 
                include the United States or any agency or 
                instrumentality thereof.
                    ``(C) 501(c)(3) organization.--The term `501(c)(3) 
                organization' means any organization described in 
                section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 
                501(a).''
    (b) Repeal of Qualified 501(c)(3) Bond Designation.--Section 145 
(relating to qualified 501(c)(3) bonds) is repealed.
    (c) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Paragraph (3) of section 141(b) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``government use'' in subparagraph 
                (A)(ii)(I) and subparagraph (B)(ii) and inserting 
                ``exempt person use'',
                    (B) by striking ``a government use'' in 
                subparagraph (B) and inserting ``an exempt person 
                use'',
                    (C) by striking ``related business use'' in 
                subparagraph (A)(ii)(II) and subparagraph (B) and 
                inserting ``related private business use'',
                    (D) by striking ``related business use'' in the 
                heading of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``related 
                private business use'', and
                    (E) by striking ``government use'' in the heading 
                thereof and inserting ``exempt person use''.
            (2) Subparagraph (A) of section 141(b)(6) is amended by 
        striking ``a governmental unit'' and inserting ``an exempt 
        person''.
            (3) Paragraph (7) of section 141(b) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``government use'' and inserting 
                ``exempt person use'', and
                    (B) by striking ``Government use'' in the heading 
                thereof and inserting ``Exempt person use''.
            (4) Section 141(b) is amended by striking paragraph (9).
            (5) Paragraph (1) of section 141(c) is amended by striking 
        ``governmental units'' and inserting ``exempt persons''.
            (6) Section 141 is amended by redesignating subsection (e) 
        as subsection (f) and by inserting after subsection (d) the 
        following new subsection:
    ``(e) Certain Issues Used To Provide Residential Rental Housing for 
Family Units.--
            ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), for 
        purposes of this title, the term `private activity bond' 
        includes any bond issued as part of an issue if any portion of 
        the net proceeds of the issue are to be used (directly or 
        indirectly) by an exempt person described in section 
        150(a)(2)(A)(ii) to provide residential rental property for 
        family units. This paragraph shall not apply if the bond would 
        not be a private activity bond if the section 501(c)(3) 
        organization were not an exempt person.
            ``(2) Exception for bonds used to provide qualified 
        residential rental projects.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
        any bond issued as part of an issue if the portion of such 
        issue which is to be used as described in paragraph (1) is to 
        be used to provide--
                    ``(A) a residential rental property for family 
                units if the first use of such property is pursuant to 
                such issue,
                    ``(B) qualified residential rental projects (as 
                defined in section 142(d)), or
                    ``(C) property which is to be substantially 
                rehabilitated in a rehabilitation beginning within the 
                2-year period ending 1 year after the date of the 
                acquisition of such property.
            ``(3) Substantial rehabilitation.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
                subparagraph (B), rules similar to the rules of section 
                47(c)(1)(C) shall apply in determining for purposes of 
                paragraph (2)(C) whether property is substantially 
                rehabilitated.
                    ``(B) Exception.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), 
                clause (ii) of section 47(c)(1)(C) shall not apply, but 
                the Secretary may extend the 24-month period in section 
                47(c)(1)(C)(i) where appropriate due to circumstances 
                not within the control of the owner.
            ``(4) Certain property treated as new property.--Solely for 
        purposes of determining under paragraph (2)(A) whether the 1st 
        use of property is pursuant to tax-exempt financing--
                    ``(A) In general.--If--
                            ``(i) the 1st use of property is pursuant 
                        to taxable financing,
                            ``(ii) there was a reasonable expectation 
                        (at the time such taxable financing was 
                        provided) that such financing would be replaced 
                        by tax-exempt financing, and
                            ``(iii) the taxable financing is in fact so 
                        replaced within a reasonable period after the 
                        taxable financing was provided,
                then the 1st use of such property shall be treated as 
                being pursuant to the tax-exempt financing.
                    ``(B) Special rule where no operating state or 
                local program for tax-exempt financing.--If, at the 
                time of the 1st use of property, there was no operating 
                State or local program for tax-exempt financing of the 
                property, the 1st use of the property shall be treated 
                as pursuant to the 1st tax-exempt financing of the 
                property.
                    ``(C) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph:
                            ``(i) Tax-exempt financing.--The term `tax-
                        exempt financing' means financing provided by 
                        tax-exempt bonds.
                            ``(ii) Taxable financing.--The term 
                        `taxable financing' means financing which is 
                        not tax-exempt financing.''
            (7) Section 141(f), as redesignated by paragraph (6), is 
        amended--
                    (A) by adding ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
                (E),
                    (B) by striking ``, or'' at the end of subparagraph 
                (F), and inserting in lieu thereof a period, and
                    (C) by striking subparagraph (G).
            (8) The last sentence of section 144(b)(1) is amended by 
        striking ``(determined'' and all that follows to the period.
            (9) Clause (ii) of section 144(c)(2)(C) is amended by 
        striking ``a governmental unit'' and inserting ``an exempt 
        person''.
            (10) Section 146(g) is amended--
                    (A) by striking paragraph (2), and
                    (B) by redesignating the remaining paragraphs after 
                paragraph (1) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
            (11) The heading of section 146(k)(3) is amended by 
        striking ``governmental'' and inserting ``exempt person''.
            (12) The heading of section 146(m) is amended by striking 
        ``Government'' and inserting ``Exempt Person''.
            (13) Subsection (h) of section 147 is amended to read as 
        follows:
    ``(h) Certain Rules Not To Apply to Mortgage Revenue Bonds and 
Qualified Student Loan Bonds.--Subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) shall 
not apply to any qualified mortgage bond, qualified veterans' mortgage 
bond, or qualified student loan bond.''
            (14) Section 147 is amended by striking paragraph (4) of 
        subsection (b) and redesignating paragraph (5) of such 
        subsection as paragraph (4).
            (15) Subparagraph (F) of section 148(d)(3) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or which is a qualified 501(c)(3) 
                bond'', and
                    (B) by striking ``governmental use bonds and 
                qualified 501(c)(3)'' in the heading thereof and 
                inserting ``exempt person''.
            (16) Subclause (II) of section 148(f)(4)(B)(ii) is amended 
        by striking ``(other than a qualified 501(c)(3) bond)''.
            (17) Clause (iv) of section 148(f)(4)(C) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``a governmental unit or a 
                501(c)(3) organization'' each place it appears and 
                inserting ``an exempt person'',
                    (B) by striking ``qualified 501(c)(3) bonds,'', and
                    (C) by striking the comma after ``private activity 
                bonds'' the first place it appears.
            (18) Subparagraph (A) of section 148(f)(7) is amended by 
        striking ``(other than a qualified 501(c)(3) bond)''.
            (19) Paragraph (2) of section 149(d) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``(other than a qualified 501(c)(3) 
                bond)'', and
                    (B) by striking ``Certain private'' in the heading 
                thereof and inserting ``Private''.
            (20) Section 149(e)(2) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``which is not a private activity 
                bond'' in the second sentence and inserting ``which is 
                a bond issued for an exempt person described in section 
                150(a)(2)(A)(i)'', and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following new 
                sentence: ``Subparagraph (D) shall not apply to any 
                bond which is not a private activity bond but which 
                would be such a bond if the 501(c)(3) organization 
                using the proceeds thereof were not an exempt person.''
            (21) The heading of subsection (b) of section 150 is 
        amended by striking ``Tax-Exempt Private Activity Bonds'' and 
        inserting ``Certain Tax-Exempt Bonds''.
            (22) Paragraph (3) of section 150(b) is amended--
                    (A) by inserting ``owned by a 501(c)(3) 
                organization'' after ``any facility'' in subparagraph 
                (A),
                    (B) by striking ``any private activity bond which, 
                when issued, purported to be a tax-exempt qualified 
                501(c)(3) bond'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting 
                ``any bond which, when issued, purported to be a tax-
                exempt bond, and which would be a private activity bond 
                if the 501(c)(3) organization using the proceeds 
                thereof were not an exempt person'', and
                    (C) by striking the heading thereof and inserting 
                ``Bonds for exempt persons other than governmental 
                units.--''.
            (23) Paragraph (5) of section 150(b) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``private activity'' in 
                subparagraph (A),
                    (B) by inserting ``and which would be a private 
                activity bond if the 501(c)(3) organization using the 
                proceeds thereof were not an exempt person'' after 
                ``tax-exempt bond'' in subparagraph (A),
                    (C) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the 
                following new subparagraph:
                    ``(B) such facility is required to be owned by an 
                exempt person, and'', and
                    (D) by striking ``governmental units or 501(c)(3) 
                organizations'' in the heading thereof and inserting 
                ``exempt persons''.
            (24) Section 150 is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new subsection:
    ``(f) Certain Rules To Apply to Bonds for Exempt Persons Other Than 
Governmental Units.--
            ``(1) In general.--Nothing in section 103(a) or any other 
        provision of law shall be construed to provide an exemption 
        from Federal income tax for interest on any bond which would be 
        a private activity bond if the 501(c)(3) organization using the 
        proceeds thereof were not an exempt person unless such bond 
        satisfies the requirements of subsections (b) and (f) of 
        section 147.
            ``(2) Special rule for pooled financing of 501(c)(3) 
        organization.--
                    ``(A) In general.--At the election of the issuer, a 
                bond described in paragraph (1) shall be treated as 
                meeting the requirements of section 147(b) if such bond 
                meets the requirements of subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Requirements.--A bond meets the requirements 
                of this subparagraph if--
                            ``(i) 95 percent or more of the net 
                        proceeds of the issue of which such bond is a 
                        part are to be used to make or finance loans to 
                        2 or more 501(c)(3) organizations or 
                        governmental units for acquisition of property 
                        to be used by such organizations,
                            ``(ii) each loan described in clause (i) 
                        satisfies the requirements of section 147(b) 
                        (determined by treating each loan as a separate 
                        issue),
                            ``(iii) before such bond is issued, a 
                        demand survey was conducted which shows a 
                        demand for financing greater than an amount 
                        equal to 120 percent of the lendable proceeds 
                        of such issue, and
                            ``(iv) 95 percent or more of the net 
                        proceeds of such issue are to be loaned to 
                        501(c)(3) organizations or governmental units 
                        within 1 year of issuance and, to the extent 
                        there are any unspent proceeds after such 1-
                        year period, bonds issued as part of such issue 
                        are to be redeemed as soon as possible 
                        thereafter (and in no event later than 18 
                        months after issuance).
                A bond shall not meet the requirements of this 
                subparagraph if the maturity date of any bond issued as 
                part of such issue is more than 30 years after the date 
                on which the bond was issued (or, in the case of a 
                refunding or series of refundings, the date on which 
                the original bond was issued).''
            (25) Section 1302 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 is 
        repealed.
            (26) Subparagraph (C) of section 57(a)(5) is amended by 
        striking clause (ii) and redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) 
        as clauses (ii) and (iii), respectively.
            (27) Paragraph (3) of section 103(b) is amended by 
        inserting ``and section 150(f)'' after ``section 149''.
            (28) Paragraph (3) of section 265(b) is amended--
                    (A) by striking clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) and 
                inserting the following:
                            ``(ii) Certain bonds not treated as private 
                        activity bonds.--For purposes of clause 
                        (i)(II), there shall not be treated as a 
                        private activity bond any obligation issued to 
                        refund (or which is part of a series of 
                        obligations issued to refund) an obligation 
                        issued before August 8, 1986, which was not an 
                        industrial development bond (as defined in 
                        section 103(b)(2) as in effect on the day 
                        before the date of the enactment of the Tax 
                        Reform Act of 1986) or a private loan bond (as 
                        defined in section 103(o)(2)(A), as so in 
                        effect, but without regard to any exemption 
                        from such definition other than section 
                        103(o)(2)(A)).''; and
                    (B) by striking ``(other than a qualified 501(c)(3) 
                bond, as defined in section 145)'' in subparagraph 
                (C)(ii)(I).
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to bonds (including refunding bonds) issued after December 31, 
1994.

   Subtitle D--Tax Treatment of Long-Term Care Insurance and Services

SEC. 7401. QUALIFIED LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES TREATED AS MEDICAL CARE.

    (a) General Rule.--Paragraph (1) of section 213(d) (defining 
medical care) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph 
(B), by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D), and by 
inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(C) for qualified long-term care services (as 
                defined in subsection (g)), or''.
    (b) Qualified Long-Term Care Services Defined.--Section 213 
(relating to the deduction for medical, dental, etc., expenses) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(g) Qualified Long-Term Care Services.--For purposes of this 
section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified long-term care 
        services' means necessary diagnostic, curing, mitigating, 
        treating, preventive, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services, 
        and maintenance and personal care services (whether performed 
        in a residential or nonresidential setting) which--
                    ``(A) are required by an individual during any 
                period the individual is an incapacitated individual 
                (as defined in paragraph (2)),
                    ``(B) have as their primary purpose--
                            ``(i) the provision of needed assistance 
                        with 1 or more activities of daily living (as 
                        defined in paragraph (3)), or
                            ``(ii) protection from threats to health 
                        and safety due to severe cognitive impairment, 
                        and
                    ``(C) are provided pursuant to a continuing plan of 
                care prescribed by a licensed professional (as defined 
                in paragraph (4)).
            ``(2) Incapacitated individual.--The term `incapacitated 
        individual' means any individual who--
                    ``(A) is unable to perform, without substantial 
                assistance from another individual (including 
                assistance involving cueing or substantial 
                supervision), at least 2 activities of daily living as 
                defined in paragraph (3), or
                    ``(B) has severe cognitive impairment as defined by 
                the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of 
                Health and Human Services.
        Such term shall not include any individual otherwise meeting 
        the requirements of the preceding sentence unless a licensed 
        professional within the preceding 12-month period has certified 
        that such individual meets such requirements.
            ``(3) Activities of daily living.--Each of the following is 
        an activity of daily living:
                    ``(A) Eating.
                    ``(B) Toileting.
                    ``(C) Transferring.
                    ``(D) Bathing.
                    ``(E) Dressing.
            ``(4) Licensed professional.--The term `licensed 
        professional' means--
                    ``(A) a physician or registered professional nurse, 
                or
                    ``(B) any other individual who meets such 
                requirements as may be prescribed by the Secretary 
                after consultation with the Secretary of Health and 
                Human Services.
            ``(5) Certain services not included.--The term `qualified 
        long-term care services' shall not include any services 
        provided to an individual--
                    ``(A) by a relative (directly or through a 
                partnership, corporation, or other entity) unless the 
                relative is a licensed professional with respect to 
                such services, or
                    ``(B) by a corporation or partnership which is 
                related (within the meaning of section 267(b) or 
                707(b)) to the individual.
        For purposes of this paragraph, the term `relative' means an 
        individual bearing a relationship to the individual which is 
        described in paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152(a).''
    (c) Technical Amendments.--
            (1) Subparagraph (D) of section 213(d)(1) (as redesignated 
        by subsection (a)) is amended to read as follows:
                    ``(D) for insurance (including amounts paid as 
                premiums under part B of title XVIII of the Social 
                Security Act, relating to supplementary medical 
                insurance for the aged) covering medical care referred 
                to in--
                            ``(i) subparagraphs (A) and (B), or
                            ``(ii) subparagraph (C), but only if such 
                        insurance is provided under a qualified long-
                        term care insurance policy (as defined in 
                        section 7702B(b)) and the amount paid for such 
                        insurance is not disallowed under section 
                        7702B(d)(4).''
            (2) Paragraph (6) of section 213(d) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``subparagraphs (A) and (B)'' and 
                inserting ``subparagraph (A), (B), and (C)'', and
                    (B) by striking ``paragraph (1)(C)'' in 
                subparagraph (A) and inserting ``paragraph (1)(D)''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.

SEC. 7402. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE.

    (a) General Rule.--Chapter 79 (relating to definitions) is amended 
by inserting after section 7702A the following new section:

``SEC. 7702B. TREATMENT OF LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE.

    ``(a) In General.--For purposes of this title--
            ``(1) a qualified long-term care insurance policy (as 
        defined in subsection (b)) shall be treated as an accident or 
        health insurance contract,
            ``(2) amounts (other than policyholder dividends (as 
        defined in section 808) or premium refunds) received under a 
        qualified long-term care insurance policy shall be treated as 
        amounts received for personal injuries and sickness and shall 
        be treated as reimbursement for expenses actually incurred for 
        medical care (as defined in section 213(d)),
            ``(3) any plan of an employer providing coverage under a 
        qualified long-term care insurance policy shall be treated as 
        an accident or health plan with respect to such coverage,
            ``(4) except as provided in subsection (d)(4), amounts paid 
        for a qualified long-term care insurance policy providing the 
        benefits described in subsection (b)(6)(B) shall be treated as 
        payments made for insurance for purposes of section 
        213(d)(1)(D), and
            ``(5) a qualified long-term care insurance policy shall be 
        treated as a guaranteed renewable contract subject to the rules 
        of section 816(e).
    ``(b) Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Policy.--For purposes of 
this title:
            ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified long-term care 
        insurance policy' means any certified long-term care policy (as 
        defined in section 1011(4)(A)) of the Health Security Act) 
        that--
                    ``(A) limits benefits under such policy to 
                individuals who are certified by a licensed 
                professional (as defined in section 213(g)(4)) within 
                the preceding 12-month period--
                            ``(i) as being unable to perform, without 
                        substantial assistance from another individual 
                        (including assistance involving cueing or 
                        substantial supervision), 2 or more activities 
                        of daily living (as defined in section 
                        213(g)(3)), or
                            ``(ii) having a severe cognitive impairment 
                        (as defined in section 213(g)(2)(B)), and
                    ``(B) satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (2), 
                (3), (4), (5), and (6).
            ``(2) Premium requirements.--The requirements of this 
        paragraph are met with respect to a policy if such policy 
        provides that premium payments may not be made earlier than the 
        date such payments would have been made if the contract 
        provided for level annual payments over the life expectancy of 
        the insured or 20 years, whichever is shorter. A policy shall 
        not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of the 
        preceding sentence solely by reason of a provision in the 
        policy providing for a waiver of premiums if the insured 
        becomes an individual certified in accordance with paragraph 
        (1)(A).
            ``(3) Prohibition of cash value.--The requirements of this 
        paragraph are met if the policy does not provide for a cash 
        value or other money that can be paid, assigned, pledged as 
        collateral for a loan, or borrowed, other than as provided in 
        paragraph (4).
            ``(4) Refunds of premiums and dividends.--The requirements 
        of this paragraph are met with respect to a policy if such 
        policy provides that--
                    ``(A) policyholder dividends are required to be 
                applied as a reduction in future premiums or, to the 
                extent permitted under paragraph (6), to increase 
                benefits described in subsection (a)(2),
                    ``(B) refunds of premiums upon a partial surrender 
                or a partial cancellation are required to be applied as 
                a reduction in future premiums, and
                    ``(C) any refund on the death of the insured, or on 
                a complete surrender or cancellation of the policy, 
                cannot exceed the aggregate premiums paid under the 
                contract.
        Any refund on a complete surrender or cancellation of the 
        policy shall be includible in gross income to the extent that 
        any deduction or exclusion was allowable with respect to the 
        premiums.
            ``(5) Coordination with other entitlements.--The 
        requirements of this paragraph are met with respect to a policy 
        if such policy does not pay, or provide reimbursement for, 
        expenses incurred to the extent that such expenses are also 
        paid or reimbursed under title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
        or are paid or reimbursed under a certified standard health 
        plan (as defined in section 1011(2)(A)) of the Health Security 
        Act).
            ``(6) Maximum benefit.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The requirements of this 
                paragraph are met if the benefits payable under the 
                policy for any period (whether on a periodic basis or 
                otherwise) may not exceed the dollar amount in effect 
                for such period.
                    ``(B) Nonreimbursement payments permitted.--
                Benefits shall include all payments described in 
                subsection (a)(2) to or on behalf of an insured 
                individual without regard to the expenses incurred 
                during the period to which the payments relate. For 
                purposes of section 213(a), such payments shall be 
                treated as compensation for expenses paid for medical 
                care.
                    ``(C) Dollar amount.--The dollar amount in effect 
                under this paragraph shall be $150 per day (or the 
                equivalent amount within the calendar year in the case 
                of payments on other than a per diem basis).
                    ``(D) Adjustments for increased costs.--
                            ``(i) In general.--In the case of any 
                        calendar year after 1996, the dollar amount in 
                        effect under subparagraph (C) for any period or 
                        portion thereof occurring during such calendar 
                        year shall be equal to the sum of--
                                    ``(I) the amount in effect under 
                                subparagraph (C) for the preceding 
                                calendar year (after application of 
                                this subparagraph), plus
                                    ``(II) the product of the amount 
                                referred to in subclause (I) multiplied 
                                by the cost-of-living adjustment for 
                                the calendar year.
                            ``(ii) Cost-of-living adjustment.--For 
                        purposes of clause (i), the cost-of-living 
                        adjustment for any calendar year is the 
                        percentage (if any) by which the cost index 
                        under clause (iii) for the preceding calendar 
                        year exceeds such index for the second 
                        preceding calendar year.
                            ``(iii) Cost index.--The Secretary, in 
                        consultation with the Secretary of Health and 
                        Human Services, shall before January 1, 1997, 
                        establish a cost index to measure increases in 
                        costs of nursing home and similar facilities. 
                        The Secretary may from time to time revise such 
                        index to the extent necessary to accurately 
                        measure increases or decreases in such costs.
                            ``(iv) Special rule for calendar year 
                        1997.--Notwithstanding clause (ii), for 
                        purposes of clause (i), the cost-of-living 
                        adjustment for calendar year 1997 is the sum of 
                        1.5 percent plus the percentage by which the 
                        CPI for calendar year 1996 (as defined in 
                        section 1(f)(4)) exceeds the CPI for calendar 
                        year 1995 (as so defined).
                    ``(E) Period.--For purposes of this paragraph, a 
                period begins on the date that an individual has a 
                condition which would qualify for certification under 
                subsection (b)(1)(A) and ends on the earlier of the 
                date upon which--
                            ``(i) such individual has not been so 
                        certified within the preceding 12-months, or
                            ``(ii) the individual's condition ceases to 
                        be such as to qualify for certification under 
                        subsection (b)(1)(A).
                    ``(F) Aggregation rule.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, all policies issued with respect to the same 
                insured shall be treated as one policy.
    ``(c) Treatment of Long-Term Care Insurance Policies.--For purposes 
of this title, any amount received or coverage provided under a long-
term care insurance policy that is not a qualified long-term care 
insurance policy shall not be treated as an amount received for 
personal injuries or sickness or provided under an accident or health 
plan and shall not be treated as excludible from gross income under any 
provision of this title.
    ``(d) Treatment of Coverage Provided as Part of a Life Insurance 
Contract.--Except as otherwise provided in regulations prescribed by 
the Secretary, in the case of any long-term care insurance coverage 
(whether or not qualified) provided by rider on a life insurance 
contract--
            ``(1) In general.--This section shall apply as if the 
        portion of the contract providing such coverage is a separate 
        contract or policy.
            ``(2) Premiums and charges for long-term care coverage.--
        Premium payments for coverage under a long-term care insurance 
        policy and charges against the life insurance contract's cash 
        surrender value (within the meaning of section 7702(f)(2)(A)) 
        for such coverage shall be treated as premiums for purposes of 
        subsection (b)(2).
            ``(3) Application of section 7702.--Section 7702(c)(2) 
        (relating to the guideline premium limitation) shall be applied 
        by increasing the guideline premium limitation with respect to 
        a life insurance contract, as of any date--
                    ``(A) by the sum of any charges (but not premium 
                payments) described in paragraph (2) made to that date 
                under the contract, less
                    ``(B) any such charges the imposition of which 
                reduces the premiums paid for the contract (within the 
                meaning of section 7702(f)(1)).
            ``(4) Application of section 213.--No deduction shall be 
        allowed under section 213(a) for charges against the life 
        insurance contract's cash surrender value described in 
        paragraph (2), unless such charges are includible in income as 
        a result of the application of section 72(e)(10) and the 
        coverage provided by the rider is a qualified long-term care 
        insurance policy under subsection (b).
            ``(5) Amount of distribution under rider.--This subsection 
        shall not apply to any rider on a life insurance contract 
        unless the percentage reduction in the cash surrender value of 
        the contract by reason of any payment under the rider does not 
        exceed the percentage reduction in the death benefit payable 
        under the contract by reason of the payment.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `portion' means only the 
terms and benefits under a life insurance contract that are in addition 
to the terms and benefits under the contract without regard to the 
coverage under a long-term care insurance policy, except that the 
coverage under a rider described in this subsection shall not fail to 
be treated as such an addition by reason of a reduction in the 
contract's death benefit or cash surrender value resulting from any 
payment under the rider.
    ``(e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary to carry out the requirements of this section, 
including regulations to prevent the avoidance of this section by 
providing long-term care insurance coverage under a life insurance 
contract and to provide for the proper allocation of amounts between 
the long-term care and life insurance portions of a contract.''
    (b) Cafeteria Plans.--Section 125(f) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new sentence: ``Such term does not include any 
coverage or benefits under a qualified long-term care policy (as 
defined in section 7702B).''
    (c) Reserves.--Clause (iii) of section 807(d)(3)(A) is amended by 
inserting ``(other than a qualified long-term care insurance policy 
within the meaning of section 7702(B))'' after ``contract''.
    (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 79 is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7702A the 
following new item:

                              ``Sec. 7702B. Treatment of long-term care 
                                        insurance.''
    (e) Effective Date.--
            (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
        apply to policies issued after December 31, 1995, except that a 
        policy issued before January 1, 1996, which, on January 1, 
        1996, satisfies the requirements of a qualified long-term care 
        insurance policy as set forth in section 7702B(b) of the 
        Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as having been 
        issued on January 1, 1996.
            (2) Transition rule.--If, after the date of enactment of 
        this Act and before January 1, 1996, a policy providing for 
        long-term care insurance coverage is exchanged solely for a 
        qualified long-term care insurance policy (as defined in 
        section 7702B(b) of such code), no gain or loss shall be 
        recognized on the exchange, except that gain (if any) shall be 
        recognized to the extent of the sum of the money and the fair 
        market value of the other property received. For purposes of 
        this paragraph, the cancellation of a policy providing for 
        long-term care insurance coverage and reinvestment of the 
        cancellation proceeds in a qualified long-term care insurance 
        policy within 60 days thereafter shall be treated as an 
        exchange.
            (3) Issuance of rider not treated as material change.--For 
        purposes of applying section 101(f), 7702, or 7702A of such 
        Code to any contract, the issuance of a rider on a life 
        insurance contract providing long-term care insurance coverage 
        shall not be treated as a modification or material change of 
        such contract.

SEC. 7403. TAX TREATMENT OF ACCELERATED DEATH BENEFITS UNDER LIFE 
              INSURANCE CONTRACTS.

    (a) General Rule.--Section 101 (relating to certain death benefits) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(g) Treatment of Certain Accelerated Death Benefits.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, any amount 
        received under a life insurance contract on the life of an 
        insured who is a terminally ill individual shall be treated as 
        an amount paid by reason of the death of such insured.
            ``(2) Necessary conditions.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
                any amount received unless--
                            ``(i) the total amount received is not less 
                        than the present value (determined under 
                        subparagraph (B)) of the reduction in the death 
                        benefit otherwise payable in the event of the 
                        death of the insured, and
                            ``(ii) the percentage reduction in the cash 
                        surrender value of the contract by reason of 
                        the distribution does not exceed the percentage 
                        reduction in the death benefit payable under 
                        the contract by reason of such distribution.
                    ``(B) Present value.--The present value of the 
                reduction in the death benefit shall be determined by--
                            ``(i) using a discount rate which is based 
                        on an interest rate which does not exceed the 
                        highest interest rate set forth in subparagraph 
                        (C), and
                            ``(ii) assuming that the death benefit (or 
                        the portion thereof) would have been paid on 
                        the date which is 12 months after the date of 
                        the certification referred to in paragraph (3).
                    ``(C) Rates.--The interest rates set forth in this 
                subparagraph are the following:
                            ``(i) the 90-day Treasury bill yield,
                            ``(ii) the rate described as Moody's 
                        Corporate Bond Yield Average-Monthly Average 
                        Corporates as published by Moody's Investors 
                        Service, Inc., or any successor thereto, for 
                        the calendar month ending 2 months before the 
                        date on which the rate is determined, and
                            ``(iii) the rate used to compute the cash 
                        surrender values under the contract during the 
                        applicable period plus 1 percent per annum.
                    ``(D) Special rules relating to liens.--If a lien 
                is imposed against a life insurance contract with 
                respect to any amount referred to in paragraph (1)--
                            ``(i) for purposes of subparagraph (A), the 
                        amount of such lien shall be treated as a 
                        reduction (at the time of receipt) in the death 
                        benefit or cash surrender value to the extent 
                        that such benefit or value, as the case may be, 
                        is (or may become) subject to the lien, and
                            ``(ii) paragraph (1) shall not apply to the 
                        amount received unless any rate of interest 
                        with respect to any amount in connection with 
                        which such lien is imposed does not exceed the 
                        highest rate set forth in subparagraph (C).
            ``(3) Terminally ill individual.--For purposes of this 
        subsection, the term `terminally ill individual' means an 
        individual who the insurer has determined, after receipt of an 
        acceptable certification by a licensed physician, has an 
        illness or physical condition which can reasonably be expected 
        to result in death within 12 months after the date of 
        certification.
            ``(4) Exception for business-related policies.--This 
        subsection shall not apply in the case of any amount paid to 
        any taxpayer other than the insured if such taxpayer has an 
        insurable interest with respect to the life of the insured by 
        reason of the insured being a director, officer, or employee of 
        the taxpayer or by reason of the insured having a financial 
        interest in any trade or business carried on by the taxpayer.''
    (b) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts received 
        after the date of the enactment of this Act.
            (2) Delay in application of discount rules.--Clause (i) of 
        section 101(g)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall 
        not apply to any amount received before January 1, 1995.
            (3) Issuance of rider not treated as material change.--For 
        purposes of applying section 101(f), 7702, or 7702A of the 
        Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to any contract, the issuance of 
        a qualified accelerated death benefit rider (as defined in 
        section 818(g) of such Code (as added by this Act)) shall not 
        be treated as a modification or material change of such 
        contract.

SEC. 7404. TAX TREATMENT OF COMPANIES ISSUING QUALIFIED ACCELERATED 
              DEATH BENEFIT RIDERS.

    (a) Qualified Accelerated Death Benefit Riders Treated as Life 
Insurance.--Section 818 (relating to other definitions and special 
rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(g) Qualified Accelerated Death Benefit Riders Treated as Life 
Insurance.--For purposes of this part--
            ``(1) In general.--Any reference to a life insurance 
        contract shall be treated as including a reference to a 
        qualified accelerated death benefit rider on such contract.
            ``(2) Qualified accelerated death benefit riders.--For 
        purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified accelerated 
        death benefit rider' means any rider on a life insurance 
        contract which provides for a distribution to an individual 
        upon the insured becoming a terminally ill individual (as 
        defined in section 101(g)(3)).''
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1995.

                  Subtitle E--Other Revenue Provisions

                  PART 1--EMPLOYMENT STATUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 7501. EMPLOYMENT STATUS PROPOSAL REQUIRED FROM DEPARTMENT OF THE 
              TREASURY.

    Not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
submit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a 
legislative proposal providing statutory standards for the 
classification of workers as employees or independent contractors.

SEC. 7502. INCREASE IN SERVICES REPORTING PENALTIES.

    (a) Increase in Penalty.--Section 6721(a) (relating to imposition 
of penalty) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
            ``(3) Increased penalty for returns involving payments for 
        services.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Subject to the overall 
                limitation of paragraph (1), the amount of the penalty 
                under paragraph (1) for any failure with respect to any 
                applicable return shall be equal to the greater of $50 
                or 5 percent of the amount required to be reported 
                correctly but not so reported.
                    ``(B) Exception where substantial compliance.--
                Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to failures with 
                respect to applicable returns required to be filed by a 
                person during any calendar year if the aggregate amount 
                which is timely and correctly reported on applicable 
                returns filed by the person for the calendar year is at 
                least 97 percent of the aggregate amount which is 
                required to be reported on applicable returns by the 
                person for the calendar year.
                    ``(C) Applicable return.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, the term `applicable return' means any 
                information return required to be filed under--
                            ``(i) section 6041(a) but only if such 
                        return relates to payments to any person for 
                        services performed by such person (other than 
                        as an employee), or
                            ``(ii) section 6041A(a).''
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 6721(a)(1) is amended by 
striking ``In'' and inserting ``Except as provided in paragraph (3), 
in''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to returns the due date for which (without regard to extensions) 
is more than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

          PART 2--TAX INCENTIVES FOR HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS

SEC. 7511. NONREFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR CERTAIN PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES 
              PROVIDERS.

    (a) In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting 
after section 22 the following new section:

``SEC. 23. PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit 
against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount 
equal to the product of--
            ``(1) the number of months during such taxable year--
                    ``(A) during which the taxpayer is a qualified 
                primary health services provider, and
                    ``(B) which are within the taxpayer's eligible 
                service period, and
            ``(2) $1,000 ($500 in the case of a qualified practitioner 
        who is not a physician).
    ``(b) Qualified Primary Health Services Provider.--For purposes of 
this section--
            ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified primary health 
        services provider' means, with respect to any month, any 
        qualified practitioner who--
                    ``(A) has in effect a certification by the Bureau 
                as a provider of primary health services and such 
                certification is, when issued, for a health 
                professional shortage area in which the qualified 
                practitioner is providing primary health services,
                    ``(B) is providing primary health services full 
                time in the health professional shortage area 
                identified in such certification, and
                    ``(C) has not received a scholarship under the 
                National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program or 
                any loan repayments under the National Health Service 
                Corps Loan Repayment Program.
            ``(2) Special rules relating to shortage areas.--
                    ``(A) Areas ceasing to be shortage areas.--For 
                purposes of paragraph (1)(B) and subsection (e)(2), a 
                provider shall be treated as providing services in a 
                health professional shortage area when such area ceases 
                to be such an area if it was such an area on the first 
                day of the provider's eligible service period.
                    ``(B) Areas within metropolitan areas.--A qualified 
                practitioner who is providing services within a 
                metropolitan statistical area (as defined in section 
                143(k)(2)) shall not be treated as meeting the 
                requirements of paragraph (1)(B) unless such services 
                are provided for, or on behalf of, a governmental or 
                nonprofit entity.
            ``(3) Qualified practitioner.--The term `qualified 
        practitioner' means a physician, a physician assistant, a nurse 
        practitioner, or a certified nurse-midwife.
    ``(c) Eligible Service Period.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `eligible service period' means the period of 36 consecutive 
calendar months beginning with the first month the taxpayer is a 
qualified primary health services provider (as specified in the 
certification under subsection (b)(1)(A)). A taxpayer shall not have 
more than 1 eligible service period.
    ``(d) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
            ``(1) Bureau.--The term `Bureau' means the Bureau of 
        Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services 
        Administration of the United States Public Health Service.
            ``(2) Physician.--The term `physician' has the meaning 
        given to such term by section 1861(r) of the Social Security 
        Act.
            ``(3) Physician assistant; nurse practitioner.--The terms 
        `physician assistant' and `nurse practitioner' have the 
        meanings given to such terms by section 1861(aa)(5) of the 
        Social Security Act.
            ``(4) Certified nurse-midwife.--The term `certified nurse-
        midwife' has the meaning given to such term by section 
        1861(gg)(2) of the Social Security Act.
            ``(5) Primary health services.--The term `primary health 
        services' has the meaning given such term by section 330(b)(1) 
        of the Public Health Service Act.
            ``(6) Health professional shortage area.--The term `health 
        professional shortage area' has the meaning given such term by 
        section 332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act.
            ``(7) Practitioner currently practicing in shortage 
        areas.--In the case of a qualified practitioner who, on 
        December 31, 1994, was providing primary health services in any 
        health professional shortage area--
                    ``(A) the practitioner's eligible service period 
                shall begin on January 1, 1995, and
                    ``(B) if such practitioner is a physician, 
                subsection (a)(2) shall be applied by substituting 
                `$500' for `$1,000'.
    ``(e) Recapture of Credit.--
            ``(1) In general.--If there is a recapture event during any 
        taxable year, then--
                    ``(A) no credit shall be allowed under subsection 
                (a) for such taxable year and any succeeding taxable 
                year, and
                    ``(B) the tax of the taxpayer under this chapter 
                for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount 
                equal to the aggregate credits allowed to such taxpayer 
                under this section for all prior taxable years.
            ``(2) Recapture event defined.--
                    ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, 
                the term `recapture event' means the failure of the 
                taxpayer to be a qualified primary health services 
                provider during any of the first 24 months during the 
                taxpayer's eligible service period.
                    ``(B) Secretarial waiver.--The Secretary, in 
                consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
                Services, may waive any recapture event caused by 
                extraordinary circumstances.
            ``(3) No credits against tax; minimum tax.--Any increase in 
        tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed 
        by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any 
        credit under subpart A, B, or D of this part or for purposes of 
        section 55.''
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 22 the following new item:

                              ``Sec. 23. Primary health services 
                                        providers.''
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.

SEC. 7512. EXPENSING OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.

    (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 179(b) (relating to 
dollar limitation on expensing of certain depreciable business assets) 
is amended to read as follows:
            ``(1) Dollar limitation.--
                    ``(A) General rule.--The aggregate cost which may 
                be taken into account under subsection (a) for any 
                taxable year shall not exceed $17,500.
                    ``(B) Health care property.--The aggregate cost 
                which may be taken into account under subsection (a) 
                shall be increased by the lesser of--
                            ``(i) the cost of section 179 property 
                        which is health care property placed in service 
                        during the taxable year, or
                            ``(ii) $10,000.''
    (b) Definition.--Section 179(d) (relating to definitions) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(11) Health care property.--
                    ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this section, 
                the term `health care property' means section 179 
                property--
                            ``(i) which is medical equipment used in 
                        the screening, monitoring, observation, 
                        diagnosis, or treatment of patients in a 
                        laboratory, medical, or hospital environment,
                            ``(ii) which is owned (directly or 
                        indirectly) and used by 1 or more physicians 
                        (as defined in section 1861(r) of the Social 
                        Security Act) in the active conduct of the 
                        full-time trade or business of all such 
                        physicians of providing primary health services 
                        (as defined in section 330(b)(1) of the Public 
                        Health Service Act) in a health professional 
                        shortage area (as defined in section 
                        332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act), 
                        and
                            ``(iii) substantially all the use of which 
                        is in such area.
                    ``(B) Special rule for metropolitan statistical 
                areas.--A physician who is providing services within a 
                metropolitan statistical area (as defined in section 
                143(k)(2)) shall not be treated as meeting the 
                requirements of subparagraph (A)(ii) unless such 
                services are provided for, or on behalf of, a 
                governmental or nonprofit entity.''
    (c) Recapture.--Paragraph (10) of section 179(d) is amended by 
inserting ``and with respect to any health care property which ceases 
(other than by an area failing to be treated as a health professional 
shortage area) to be health care property at any time'' before the 
period.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to property placed in service in taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1994.

                    PART 3--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 7521. POST-RETIREMENT MEDICAL AND LIFE INSURANCE RESERVES.

    (a) Minimum Period for Working Lives.--Section 419A(c)(2) (relating 
to additional reserves for post-retirement medical and life insurance 
benefits) is amended by inserting ``(but not less than 10 years)'' 
after ``working lives of the covered employees''.
    (b) Separate Accounting.--
            (1) Requirement.--Section 419A(c)(2) is amended by adding 
        at the end the following new flush sentence:
``Such reserve shall be maintained as a separate account.''
            (2) Use of reserve for other purposes.--Paragraph (1) of 
        section 4976(b) (defining disqualified benefit) is amended by 
        striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking 
        the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, 
        and'', and by adding after subparagraph (C) the following new 
        subparagraph:
                    ``(D) any payment to which subparagraph (C) does 
                not apply which is out of an account described in 
                section 419A(c)(2) and which is not used to provide a 
                post-retirement medical benefit or life insurance 
                benefit.''
    (c) Effective Dates.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
        amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions 
        paid or accrued after December 31, 1994, in taxable years 
        ending after such date.
            (2) Separate accounting.--The amendments made by subsection 
        (b) shall apply to contributions paid or accrued after the date 
        of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after 
        such date.

SEC. 7522. CREDIT FOR COST OF PERSONAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES REQUIRED BY 
              EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.

    (a) In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
(relating to nonrefundable personal credits), as amended by section 
7511, is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new 
section:

``SEC. 24. COST OF PERSONAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES REQUIRED BY EMPLOYED 
              INDIVIDUALS.

    ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
            ``(1) In general.--In the case of an eligible individual, 
        there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by 
        this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the 
        applicable percentage of the personal assistance expenses paid 
        or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
            ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
        (1), the term `applicable percentage' means 50 percent reduced 
        (but not below zero) by 10 percentage points for each $5,000 by 
        which the modified adjusted gross income (as defined in section 
        59B(d)(2)) of the taxpayer for the taxable year exceeds 
        $45,000. In the case of a married individual filing a separate 
        return, the preceding sentence shall be applied by substituting 
        `$2,500' for `$5,000' and `$22,500' for `$45,000'.
    ``(b) Limitation.--The amount of personal assistance expenses for 
the benefit of an individual which may be taken into account under 
subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of--
            ``(1) $15,000, or
            ``(2) such individual's earned income (as defined in 
        section 32(c)(2)) for the taxable year.
In the case of a joint return, the amount under the preceding sentence 
shall be determined separately for each spouse.
    ``(c) Eligible Individual.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`eligible individual' means any individual (other than a nonresident 
alien) who, by reason of any medically determinable physical impairment 
which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be 
expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months, is 
unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity without personal 
assistance services appropriate to carry out activities of daily 
living. An individual shall not be treated as an eligible individual 
unless such individual furnishes such proof thereof (in such form and 
manner, and at such times) as the Secretary may require.
    ``(d) Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Personal assistance expenses.--The term `personal 
        assistance expenses' means expenses for--
                    ``(A) personal assistance services appropriate to 
                carry out activities of daily living in or outside the 
                home,
                    ``(B) homemaker/chore services incidental to the 
                provision of such personal assistance services,
                    ``(C) in the case of an individual with a cognitive 
                impairment, assistance with life skills,
                    ``(D) communication services,
                    ``(E) work-related support services,
                    ``(F) coordination of services described in this 
                paragraph,
                    ``(G) assistive technology and devices, including 
                assessment of the need for particular technology and 
                devices and training of family members, and
                    ``(H) modifications to the principal place of abode 
                of the individual to the extent the expenses for such 
                modifications would (but for subsection (e)(2)) be 
                expenses for medical care (as defined by section 213) 
                of such individual.
            ``(2) Activities of daily living.--The term `activities of 
        daily living' means eating, toileting, transferring, bathing, 
        and dressing.
    ``(e) Special Rules.--
            ``(1) Payments to related persons.--No credit shall be 
        allowed under this section for any amount paid by the taxpayer 
        to any person who is related (within the meaning of section 267 
        or 707(b)) to the taxpayer.
            ``(2) Coordination with medical expense deduction.--Any 
        amount taken into account in determining the credit under this 
        section shall not be taken into account in determining the 
        amount of the deduction under section 213.
            ``(3) Basis reduction.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a 
        credit is allowed under this section for any expense with 
        respect to any property, the increase in the basis of such 
        property which would (but for this paragraph) result from such 
        expense shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so 
        allowed.
    ``(f) Cost-of-Living Adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year 
beginning after 1996, the $45,000 and $22,500 amounts in subsection 
(a)(2) and the $15,000 amount in subsection (b) shall be increased by 
an amount equal to--
            ``(1) such dollar amount, multiplied by
            ``(2) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under 
        section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year 
        begins by substituting `calendar year 1995' for `calendar year 
        1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any increase determined under the preceding sentence is not a 
multiple of $1,000, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest 
multiple of $1,000.''
    (b) Technical Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 is amended 
by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (24), by striking the 
period at the end of paragraph (25) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
            ``(26) in the case of any property with respect to which a 
        credit has been allowed under section 24, to the extent 
        provided in section 24(e)(3).''
    (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 23 the following new item:

                              ``Sec. 24. Cost of personal assistance 
                                        services required by employed 
                                        individuals.''
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.

SEC. 7523. DISCLOSURE OF RETURN INFORMATION FOR ADMINISTRATION OF 
              CERTAIN PROGRAMS UNDER THE HEALTH SECURITY ACT.

    (a) In General.--Section 6103(l) (relating to disclosure of returns 
and return information for purposes other than tax administration) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(15) Disclosure of return information for purposes of 
        health security act.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, upon 
                written request, disclose current return information 
                described in subparagraph (B) to any Federal, State, or 
                local agency administering an assistance program under 
                the Health Security Act.
                    ``(B) Information.--The information described in 
                this subparagraph is information which consists only of 
                adjusted gross income, the untaxed portion of social 
                security benefits, tax-exempt interest income, marital 
                status, and dependents.
                    ``(C) Restriction on disclosure.--The Secretary 
                shall disclose return information under subparagraph 
                (A) only for purposes of, and to the extent necessary 
                in, determining eligibility for, or the correct amount 
                of, assistance provided under the Health Security Act.
                    ``(D) Exclusion from matching program.--Any matches 
                of information under this paragraph shall not be 
                treated as a matching program for purposes of section 
                552a of title 5, United States Code.''
    (b) Conforming Amendments.--
            (1) Section 6103(9)(2) is amended by inserting ``or (15)'' 
        after ``subsection (l)(7)(D)''.
            (2) Section 6103(p)(3)(A) is amended by striking ``or 
        (14)'' and inserting ``(14), or (15)''.
            (3) Section 6103(p)(4) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or (12)'' in the matter preceding 
                subparagraph (A) and inserting ``(12), or (15)'', and
                    (B) by striking ``or (14)'' in subparagraph (F)(ii) 
                and inserting ``(14), or (15)''.
            (4) Section 7213(a)(2) is amended by striking ``or (12)'' 
        and inserting ``(12), or (15)''.

  Subtitle F--Graduate Medical Education and Academic Health Centers 
                               Trust Fund

SEC. 7601. ESTABLISHMENT OF GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND ACADEMIC 
              HEALTH CENTERS TRUST FUND.

    (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 (relating to 
establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new part:

                   ``PART II--HEALTH CARE TRUST FUNDS

                              ``Sec. 9551. Graduate Medical Education 
                                        and Academic Health Centers 
                                        Trust Fund

``SEC. 9551. GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND ACADEMIC HEALTH CENTERS 
              TRUST FUND.

    ``(a) Creation of Trust Fund.--
            ``(1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of 
        the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Graduate 
        Medical Education and Academic Health Centers Trust Fund', 
        consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited 
        to the Academic Health Centers Trust Fund as provided in this 
        section or section 9602(b).
            ``(2) Accounts in the trust fund.--The Graduate Medical 
        Education and Academic Health Centers Trust Fund shall consist 
        of the following 2 accounts:
                    ``(A) The Graduate Medical Education Account.
                    ``(B) The Academic Health Centers Account.
        Each such account shall consist of such amounts as are 
        allocated to it under this section.
    ``(b) Transfers to the Trust Fund.--
            ``(1) Taxes.--There are hereby appropriated to the Graduate 
        Medical Education and Academic Health Centers Trust Fund 
        amounts received in the Treasury under sections 4501 and 4502 
        (relating to assessments on insured and self-insured health 
        plans) to the extent attributable to the rates of such taxes 
        not in excess of 1.5 percent.
            ``(2) Transfers from other trust funds.--The Secretary of 
        Health and Human Services shall transfer each fiscal year to 
        the Graduate Medical Education and Academic Health Centers 
        Trust Fund from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and 
        the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund 
        established under the Social Security Act the sum of--
                    ``(A) the amount that would have been paid from the 
                Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund in such fiscal 
                year under section 1886(d)(5)(B) of such Act (as in 
                effect before the date of the enactment of the Health 
                Security Act), plus
                    ``(B) the amount that would have been paid from 
                such trust funds in such fiscal year under section 
                1886(h) of such Act (as so in effect).
    ``(c) Graduate Medical Education Account.--
            ``(1) Transfers.--There is allocated to the Graduate 
        Medical Education Account each fiscal year an amount equal to 
        the sum of--
                    ``(A) amounts described in subsection (b)(2)(B), 
                plus
                    ``(B) the excess of--
                            ``(i) the amounts made available under 
                        section 3033 of the Health Security Act, over
                            ``(ii) the amount described in subparagraph 
                        (A).
            ``(2) Expenditures.--Amounts in the Graduate Medical 
        Education Account are appropriated to make the payments 
        described in sections 3031 and 3055 of the Health Security Act, 
        and to the extent any such amount is not expended during any 
        fiscal year, such amount shall be available for such purpose 
        for subsequent fiscal years.
    ``(d) Academic Health Centers Account.--
            ``(1) Transfers.--There is allocated to the Academic Health 
        Centers Account each fiscal year an amount equal to the sum 
        of--
                    ``(A) amounts described in subsection (b)(2)(A), 
                plus
                    ``(B) the excess of--
                            ``(i) the amounts made available under 
                        section 3053 of the Health Security Act, over
                            ``(ii) the amount described in subparagraph 
                        (A).
            ``(2) Expenditures.--Amounts in the Academic Health Centers 
        Account are appropriated to make the payments described in 
        section 3051 of the Health Security Act, and to the extent any 
        such amount is not expended during any fiscal year, such amount 
        shall be available for such purpose for subsequent fiscal 
        years.
    ``(e) Rules Relating To Accounts.--
            ``(1) Insufficient funds.--If, for any fiscal year, the sum 
        of the amounts required to be allocated under subsections (c) 
        and (d) exceeds the amounts received in the Graduate Medical 
        Education and Academic Health Centers Trust Fund, then each of 
        such amounts required to be so allocated shall be reduced to an 
        amount which bears the same ratio to such amount as the amounts 
        received in the trust fund bear to the amounts required to be 
        so allocated (without regard to this paragraph).
            ``(2) Allocation of excess funds and interest.--Amounts 
        received in the Graduate Medical Education and Academic Health 
        Centers Trust Fund in excess of the amounts required to be 
        allocated under subsections (c) and (d), and amounts credited 
        to such trust fund under section 9602(b), for any fiscal year 
        shall be allocated to each account ratably on the basis of the 
        amounts allocated to the account for the fiscal year (without 
        regard to this paragraph).''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 is amended by 
inserting after the subchapter heading the following new items:

                              ``Part I. General trust funds.
                              ``Part II. Health care trust funds.

                    ``PART I--GENERAL TRUST FUNDS''.

                   TITLE VIII--OTHER FEDERAL PROGRAMS

                   Subtitle A--Indian Health Service

SEC. 8101. PURPOSES.

    The purposes of this subtitle are as follows:
            (1) To ensure the delivery of health care services to 
        American Indians and Alaska Natives in a culturally appropriate 
        manner in fulfillment of the unique trust responsibility of the 
        Federal Government and legal obligation to American Indian and 
        Alaska Native people--
                    (A) derived from the province of international law; 
                and
                    (B) founded in the treaties, Constitution, 
                statutes, and court decisions of the United States.
            (2) To provide sufficient funding for the provision of the 
        standard benefit package as it applies to all eligible 
        beneficiaries under this subtitle.
            (3) To ensure that funding levels for services and benefits 
        that are not part of the standard benefits package described in 
        this subtitle are not diluted or diminished.
            (4) To raise the health status of American Indians and 
        Alaska Natives to the highest possible level.
            (5) To raise the quality of health care delivery to 
        American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest possible 
        level.
            (6) To ensure that health care services provided to 
        American Indians and Alaska Natives are provided in a manner 
        consistent with, and carries out, the recognized Indian self-
        determination and tribal self-governance policy of the United 
        States.

SEC. 8102. DEFINITIONS.

    For the purposes of this subtitle--
            (1) the term ``American Indian'' has the meaning provided 
        the term ``Indian'' under paragraph (6);
            (2) the term ``Alaska Native'' has the meaning provided the 
        term ``Native'' under section 3(b) of the Alaska Native Claims 
        Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1602(b));
            (3) the term ``health program of the Indian Health 
        Service'' means a program which provides or is responsible for 
        obtaining health services under this Act or any other 
        applicable law through programs operated by the Indian Health 
        Service, Indian tribes, or tribal organizations, including 
        Indian tribes or tribal organizations operating under the 
        authority of the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
        Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450 et seq.);
            (4) the term ``reservation'' means the reservation of any 
        federally recognized Indian tribe, former Indian reservations 
        in Oklahoma, and lands held by incorporated Native groups, 
        regional corporations, and village corporations under the 
        provisions of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 
        U.S.C. 1601 et seq.);
            (5) the term ``urban Indian program'' means any program 
        operated pursuant to title V of the Indian Health Care 
        Improvement Act; and
            (6) the terms ``Indian'', ``Indian tribe'', ``tribal 
        organization'', ``urban Indian'', ``urban Indian 
        organization'', and ``service unit'' have the same meaning as 
        given such terms under the Indian Health Care Improvement Act 
        (25 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.).

SEC. 8103. ELIGIBILITY AND HEALTH SERVICE COVERAGE OF INDIANS.

    (a) Coverage.--The programs of the Indian Health Service shall 
remain as the principal provider of health care for Indians, except 
that nothing in this subtitle shall limit the ability of Indians to 
seek care from providers outside the programs of the Indian Health 
Service.
    (b) Eligibility.--An Indian is eligible for services under a 
program of the Indian Health Service if the individual is--
            (1) eligible to receive services pursuant to sections 36.1 
        through 36.14 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (as in 
        effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act);
            (2) an urban Indian residing in an area served by an urban 
        Indian program; or
            (3) an Indian described in section 809(b) of the Indian 
        Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1679(b)).
    (c) Limitation on Charges.--An eligible Indian (as defined in 
subsection (b)) receiving services from or being referred by a health 
program of the Indian Health Service shall not be subject to any charge 
for deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, or any other cost for health 
services provided under such program.

SEC. 8104. SUPPLEMENTAL INDIAN HEALTH CARE BENEFITS.

    (a) In General.--All individuals described in section 8103(b) shall 
remain eligible for such benefits under the laws administered by the 
Indian Health Service as supplement the standard benefit package. The 
individual shall not be subject to any charge or any other cost for 
such benefits.
    (b) Maintenance of Effort.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
requirements of this subtitle do not result in a reduction of the level 
of supplemental benefits provided by or through the Indian Health 
Service.

SEC. 8105. PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES TO NON-INDIANS.

    (a) Contracts With Health Plans.--A health program of the Indian 
Health Service may enter into a contract with a health plan for the 
provision of health care services to individuals enrolled in such 
health plan if--
            (1) the appropriate official of the program determines that 
        the provision of such health services will not result in a 
        denial or diminishment of health services to any individual 
        described in section 8103(b); and
            (2) each tribe or urban Indian organization served by the 
        program authorizes or has authorized the provision of services 
        to such individuals.
    (b) Family Treatment.--A health program of the Indian Health 
Service may provide health care services to insured non-Indian family 
members of individuals described in section 8103(b) under the same 
restrictions as those described in subsection (a).
    (c) Applicable Individual Charges.--Non-Indians receiving services 
in a program under subsection (b) shall be subject to any applicable 
deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, or any other cost for health 
services provided.

SEC. 8106. ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY PROVIDERS.

    A health program of the Indian Health Service automatically 
certified as an essential community provider under section 1462 may 
elect to accept certification--
            (1) only for eligible individuals described in section 
        8103(b);
            (2) for non-Indian individuals if each tribe or tribal 
        organization served by the program authorizes or has authorized 
        serving non-Indians; or
            (3) for eligible individuals described in section 8103(b) 
        and family members of such individuals described in section 
        8505(b) who are enrolled in a plan other than a health program 
        of the Indian Health Service, if each tribe or urban Indian 
        organization served by the program authorizes or has authorized 
        serving such family members.

SEC. 8107. PAYMENT BY OTHER PROVIDERS.

    (a) Payment for Services Provided by Indian Health Service 
Programs.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed as amending 
section 206, 401, or 402 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 
U.S.C. 1621e, 1641, or 1642) or any other provision of law relating to 
payments on behalf of Indians for health services from other Federal 
programs or from other third party payers.
    (b) Payment for Services Provided by Contractors.--Nothing in this 
subtitle shall be construed as affecting any other provision of law, 
regulation, or judicial or administrative interpretation of law or 
policy concerning the status of the Indian Health Service as the payer 
of last resort for Indians eligible for contract health services under 
a health program of the Indian Health Service.
    (c) Payment for Services by Medicare.--Programs of the Indian 
Health Service shall be eligible for payments for services provided to 
Medicare beneficiaries.
    (d) Retention of Receipts.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
law, the collections made by a health program of the Indian Health 
Service shall remain with the health program if the receipts are used 
to--
            (1) expand or improve its services;
            (2) increase the number of persons it is able to serve;
            (3) construct, expand or modernize its health care 
        facilities;
            (4) improve the administration of its health service 
        programs; or
            (5) develop or improve linkages with other health care 
        providers.
    (e) Collection.--Each health program of the Indian Health Service 
shall make every reasonable effort to collect appropriate reimbursement 
for its costs in providing health services to persons who are covered 
by public or private health insurance programs.

SEC. 8108. CONTRACTING AUTHORITY.

    Section 601(d)(1)(B) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 
U.S.C. 1661(d)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting ``(including personal 
services for the provision of direct health care services)'' after 
``goods and services''.

SEC. 8109. CONSULTATION.

    (a) OMB and Secretary.--The Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget and the Secretary shall consult, on an annual basis, with 
representatives of Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and urban 
Indian organizations concerning health care reform initiatives that 
affect Indian communities, and policy, funding, and administration of 
health programs of the Indian Health Service. The Secretary shall 
solicit and consider the views and recommendations provided by Indian 
tribes, tribal organizations, and representatives of urban Indian 
organizations in making determinations that affect Indians and Indian 
tribes and shall resolve any differences in favor of Indians and Indian 
tribes.
    (b) Federal Advisory Group.--
            (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        advisory group to assess all aspects of the development and 
        administration of the budget for programs of the Indian Health 
        Service and advise the Office of Management and Budget, the 
        Secretary and Congress with respect to such aspects.
            (2) Composition.--The advisory group shall be comprised 
        of--
                    (A) not less than one representative from each area 
                of the Indian Health Service to be appointed by the 
                Secretary from nominees of tribes and tribal 
                organizations in the respective areas;
                    (B) not less than one urban Indian representative 
                from each area the Indian Health Service with an urban 
                Indian (as defined in section 4(f) of the Indian Health 
                Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603(f)) program to be 
                appointed by the Secretary; and
                    (C) such other appointees as the Secretary 
                determines appropriate, on the condition that a 
                majority of the members are selected from nominations 
                submitted to the Secretary by a tribe or tribal 
                organization.

SEC. 8110. TRANSITIONAL STUDIES.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall conduct planning, feasibility, 
or similar health services studies related to the transition of the 
health programs of the Indian Health Service under health care reform. 
Such studies shall take into account the measurements and the means to 
accomplish the Healthy People 2000 objectives as required under 
sections 3 and 214 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act. Such 
studies shall include an assessment of--
            (1) the feasibility of developing an Indian health plan or 
        plans;
            (2) the financing necessary to provide the same level of 
        standard benefits to American Indians and Alaska Natives as 
        will be available to all other Americans;
            (3) the staffing, program and infrastructure enhancements 
        required to deliver the standard benefits package;
            (4) the facility and capital construction needs necessary 
        to provide the standard benefit package; and
            (5) the administrative improvements necessary to network, 
        share and access patient data, quality management and 
        improvement data, and financial information.
    (b) Advisory Group.--
            (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        advisory group to provide the Secretary with advise concerning 
        the focus, content and conduct of studies under subsection (a).
            (2) Composition.--The advisory group shall be comprised 
        of--
                    (A) not less than one representative from each area 
                of the Indian Health Service to be appointed by the 
                Secretary from among nominees of tribes and tribal 
                organizations in the respective areas;
                    (B) not less than one urban Indian representative 
                from each area of the Indian Health Service which an 
                urban Indian (as defined in section 4(f) of the Indian 
                Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603(f)) program 
                to appointed by the Secretary; and
                    (C) other appointees as the Secretary determines 
                appropriate, except that the Secretary shall ensure 
                that a majority of the members so appointed are 
                selected from nominations submitted to the Secretary by 
                tribes or tribal organizations.
    (c) Recommendations.--Not later than June 30, 1997, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress recommendations based on the studies conducted 
under this section, including recommendations for changes in the 
structure of Indian Health Services. A time-table for implementing 
health care reform activities shall be included in such final 
recommendations.

SEC. 8111. LOANS AND LOAN GUARANTEES.

    The Secretary may make loans, and guarantee the payment of 
principal and interest, to Federal and non-Federal lenders on behalf of 
health programs of the Indian Health Service for the purpose of 
improving and expanding such facilities. Loans and loan guarantees 
under this section shall be provided under such terms and conditions as 
the Secretary may prescribe.

SEC. 8112. SIMPLIFICATION OF BILLING.

    The Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure 
that health programs of the Indian Health Service may submit all claims 
for benefits or payment for services entitled to reimbursement in a 
manner consistent with that of all other health care providers.

SEC. 8113. LONG-TERM CARE DEMONSTRATIONS.

    Subject to the availability of appropriations under subtitle B of 
title II (for home and community-based long-term care services), the 
Secretary shall establish a demonstration program to provide five 
grants to health programs of the Indian Health Service to enable such 
Programs to plan and implement innovative methods of providing enhanced 
home and community-based long-term care services.

SEC. 8114. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

    Indian tribes shall be eligible for funds made available under this 
Act for technical assistance or transitional support.

SEC. 8115. PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS.

    Health programs of the Indian Health Service shall be eligible to 
apply for funding under public health programs authorized under title 
III of this Act (including those under section 3695(b)(14)), as deemed 
appropriate by the Secretary.

SEC. 8116. SURVEY OF HEALTH SERVICES AVAILABLE TO INDIAN VETERANS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Veterans Affairs, Indian tribes and tribal organizations, shall 
conduct a survey to assess the availability and accessibility of health 
care services for Indian veterans residing on Indian reservations.
    (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress that shall 
include recommendations concerning the survey conducted under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 8117. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

    Unless otherwise provided in this Act, no part of this Act shall be 
construed to rescind or otherwise modify any obligations, findings, or 
purposes contained in the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
1601 et seq.) and in the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450 et seq).

SEC. 8118. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Authorization.--
            (1) In general.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
        subtitle, including transitional costs and the purchase of 
        additional contract health care services for individual 
        eligible Indians, there are authorized to be appropriated 
        $515,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $930,000,000 for fiscal year 
        1996, and $1,150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 
        through 2004.
            (2) Supplemental indian health care benefits.--In addition 
        to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated (including 
        the amounts authorized to be appropriated under paragraph (1)), 
        for the purpose of carrying out section 8104, there are 
        authorized to be appropriated $360,000,000 for fiscal year 
        1995, $400,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 
        1999, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2000 
        and each fiscal year thereafter.
            (3) Loans and loan guarantees.--In addition to amounts 
        otherwise authorized to be appropriated (including the amounts 
        authorized to be appropriated under paragraph (1)), for the 
        purpose of carrying out section 8111, there are authorized to 
        be appropriated $500,000,000 for the principal of the loan. The 
        authority of the Secretary to make loans and to guarantee loans 
        under such section shall be subject to such amounts as may be 
        provided for in each fiscal year in advance in an 
        appropriations Act.
    (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established under this subtitle are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purposes of 
carrying out this subtitle.

SEC. 8119. FUNDING METHODOLOGY.

    The Secretary shall establish new methodologies, consistent with 
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, for the distribution to Indian 
tribes of all new funds that become available for health care 
initiatives under this subtitle. New distribution methodologies should 
consider differences in local resources, status of health (as declared 
under section 3 of such Act), socioeconomic status of tribal people, 
and facilities, equipment and staff available in concert with the 
establishment of Indian epidemiological centers under such Act.

               Subtitle B--Department of Veterans Affairs

SEC. 8101. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Health Care Reform Act of 
1994''.

SEC. 8102. BENEFITS AND ELIGIBILITY THROUGH DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS 
              AFFAIRS MEDICAL SYSTEM.

    (a) Department of Veterans Affairs As a Participant in Health Care 
Reform.--
            (1) In general.--Title 38, United States Code, is amended 
        by inserting after chapter 17 the following new chapter:

    ``CHAPTER 18--ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS UNDER HEALTH SECURITY ACT

                        ``SUBCHAPTER I--GENERAL

``1801. Definitions.
                      ``SUBCHAPTER II--ENROLLMENT

``1811. Enrollment: veterans.
``1812. Enrollment: CHAMPVA eligibles.
``1813. Enrollment: family members.
                       ``SUBCHAPTER III--BENEFITS

``1821. Benefits for VA enrollees.
``1822. Chapter 17 benefits.
``1823. Supplemental health benefits plans.
``1824. Limitation regarding veterans enrolled with health plans 
                            outside Department.
                   ``SUBCHAPTER IV--FINANCIAL MATTERS

``1831. Premiums, copayments, and other charges.
``1832. Medicare coverage and reimbursement.
``1833. Recovery of cost of certain care and services.
``1834. Health Plan Fund.

                        ``SUBCHAPTER I--GENERAL

``Sec. 1801. Definitions
    ``For purposes of this chapter:
            ``(1) The term `health plan' means an entity that has been 
        certified under the Health Security Act as a health plan.
            ``(2) The term `VA health plan' means a health plan that is 
        operated by the Secretary under section 7341 of this title.
            ``(3) The term `VA enrollee' means an individual enrolled 
        under the Health Security Act in a VA health plan.
            ``(4) The term `standard benefit package' means the package 
        of benefits required to be provided by a health plan under the 
        Health Security Act.

                      ``SUBCHAPTER II--ENROLLMENT

``Sec. 1811. Enrollment: veterans
    ``Each veteran may enroll with a VA health plan. A veteran who 
wants to receive the standard benefit package through the Department 
shall enroll with a VA health plan.
``Sec. 1812. Enrollment: CHAMPVA eligibles
    ``An individual who is eligible for benefits under section 1713 of 
this title may enroll with a VA health plan in the same manner as a 
veteran.
``Sec. 1813. Enrollment: family members
    ``(a) The Secretary may authorize a VA health plan to enroll 
members of the family of an enrollee under section 1811 or 1812 of this 
title, subject to payment of premiums, deductibles, copayments, and 
coinsurance as required under the Health Security Act.
    ``(b) For purposes of subsection (a), an enrollee's family is those 
individuals (other than the enrollee) included within the term `family' 
as defined in section 1113(b) of the Health Security Act.

                       ``SUBCHAPTER III--BENEFITS

``Sec. 1821. Benefits for VA enrollees
    ``The Secretary shall ensure that each VA health plan provides to 
each individual enrolled with it the items and services in the standard 
benefit package under the Health Security Act, to the extent that such 
items and services can be provided consistent with appropriations for 
that purpose. In the event that appropriations are insufficient the 
Secretary may revise the standard benefit package available to enrolled 
individuals.
``Sec. 1822. Chapter 17 benefits
    ``The Secretary shall provide to a veteran the care and services 
not included in the standard benefit package that are authorized to be 
provided under chapter 17 of this title in accordance with the terms 
and conditions applicable to that veteran and that care under such 
chapter, to the extent that such items and services can be provided 
consistent with appropriations for that purpose. In the event that 
appropriations are insufficient the Secretary may revise the standard 
benefit package available to enrolled individuals.
``Sec. 1823. Supplemental health benefits plans
    ``(a) As part of a VA health plan, the Secretary may offer to 
veterans--
            ``(1) supplemental health benefits plans (as that term is 
        defined in section 1011(3)(B) of the Health Security Act) for 
        the care and services described in subsection (b); and
            ``(2) cost-sharing plans consistent with the requirements 
        of part 4 of subtitle B of title I of the Health Security Act.
    ``(b) The care and services referred to in subsection (a) are care 
and services that--
            ``(1) are not available under the standard benefit package; 
        and
            ``(2) can be provided by the Secretary at reasonable cost.
``Sec. 1824. Limitation regarding veterans enrolled with health plans 
              outside Department
    ``A veteran who is residing in a community-rated area in which the 
Department operates a health plan and who is enrolled in a health plan 
that is not operated by the Department may be provided the items and 
services in the standard benefit package by a VA health plan only if 
the plan is reimbursed for the care provided.

                   ``SUBCHAPTER IV--FINANCIAL MATTERS

``Sec. 1831. Premiums, copayments, and other charges
    ``(a) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may not 
impose on or collect from a veteran described in subsection (b) who is 
a VA enrollee a cost-share charge of any kind (whether a premium, 
copayment, deductible, coinsurance charge, or other charge) for items 
and services in the standard benefit package that a VA health plan 
provides.
    ``(b) The veterans referred to in subsection (a) are the following:
            ``(1) Any veteran with a compensable service-connected 
        disability.
            ``(2) Any veteran whose discharge or release from the 
        active military, naval or air service was for a disability 
        incurred or aggravated in the line of duty.
            ``(3) Any veteran who is in receipt of, or who, but for a 
        suspension pursuant to section 1151 of this title (or both such 
        a suspension and the receipt of retired pay), would be entitled 
        to disability compensation, but only to the extent that such a 
        veteran's continuing eligibility for such care is provided for 
        in the judgment or settlement provided for in such section.
            ``(4) Any veteran who is a former prisoner of war.
            ``(5) Any veteran of the Mexican border period or World War 
        I.
            ``(6) Any veteran who is unable to defray the expenses of 
        necessary care as determined under section 1722(a) of this 
        title.
            ``(7) Any veteran referred to in subparagraph (A), (B), or 
        (C) of section 1710(e) of this title.
    ``(c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), in the case of a VA 
enrollee who is not described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall 
charge premiums and establish copayments, deductibles, and coinsurance 
amounts for care and services provided under this chapter. The premium 
rate, and the rates for deductibles and copayments, for each VA health 
plan shall be established by that health plan based on rules 
established under the Health Security Act.
    ``(2) The Secretary may not charge a veteran referred to in 
paragraph (1) a premium for any care or service that the Secretary 
provides the veteran under a supplemental health benefits plan offered 
under section 1823 of this title if the Secretary is required to 
provide such care or service under chapter 17 of this title.
``Sec. 1832. Medicare coverage and reimbursement
    ``(a) For purposes of any program administered by the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), a Department facility shall be deemed to be a 
Medicare provider.
    ``(b)(1) A VA health plan shall be considered to be a Medicare HMO.
    ``(2) For purposes of this section, the term `Medicare HMO' means 
an eligible organization under section 1876 of the Social Security Act.
    ``(c) In the case of care provided under this chapter to a veteran 
(other than a veteran described in section 1831(b) of this title), or 
to a family member of a veteran, who is eligible for benefits under the 
Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall reimburse a VA health plan 
or Department health-care facility providing services as a Medicare 
provider or Medicare HMO in the same amounts and under the same terms 
and conditions as that Secretary reimburses other Medicare providers or 
Medicare HMOs, respectively. The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall include with each such reimbursement a Medicare explanation of 
benefits.
    ``(d) When the Secretary provides care to a veteran, or a family 
member of a veteran, for which the Secretary receives reimbursement 
under this section, the Secretary shall require the veteran to pay to 
the Department any applicable deductible or copayment that is not 
covered by Medicare.
``Sec. 1833. Recovery of cost of certain care and services
    ``(a) In the case of an individual provided care or services 
through a VA health plan who has coverage under a supplemental health 
benefits plan pursuant to part 4 of subtitle B of title I of the Health 
Security Act, a Medicare supplemental health insurance plan, or any 
other provision of law, the Secretary has the right to recover or 
collect charges for care or services (as determined by the Secretary, 
but not including care or services for a service-connected disability) 
from the party providing that coverage to the extent that the 
individual (or the provider of the care or services) would be eligible 
to receive payment for such care or services from such party if the 
care or services had not been furnished by a department or agency of 
the United States.
    ``(b) In the case of a veteran referred to in section 1831(b) of 
this title who is enrolled in a health plan other than a VA health plan 
and who is provided care or services for a service-connected disability 
by a VA health plan, the Secretary has the right to recover or collect 
charges for such care and services from the party operating the health 
plan to the extent that the veteran (or the provider of the care or 
services) would be eligible to receive payment for such care or 
services from such party if the care or services had not been furnished 
by a department or agency of the United States.
    ``(c) The provisions of subsections (b) through (f) of section 1729 
of this title shall apply with respect to claims by the United States 
under subsection (a) or (b) in the same manner as they apply to claims 
under subsection (a) of that section.
``Sec. 1834. Health Plan Fund
    ``(a) There is hereby established in the Treasury a revolving fund 
to be known as the `Department of Veterans Affairs Health Plan Fund'.
    ``(b)(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), amounts collected or 
recovered by the Department under this subchapter by reason of the 
furnishing of care and services to an individual by a VA health plan or 
the enrollment of an individual with a VA health plan (including 
amounts received as premiums, premium discount payments, copayments or 
coinsurance, and deductibles, amounts received as third-party 
reimbursements or reimbursements from Medicare, and amounts received as 
reimbursements from another health plan for care furnished to one of 
its enrollees) shall be credited to the revolving fund.
    ``(2) Premiums collected by the Department under this subchapter 
during fiscal year 1996 or 1997 by reason of the furnishing of care and 
services under a VA health plan to a veteran referred to in section 
1831(b) of this title shall be credited to the revolving fund 
established under subsection (a) only if the amount of funds 
appropriated to the Veterans Health Care Investment Fund established 
under subsection (a)(1) of section 7346 of this title for the fiscal 
year concerned is less than the amount specified to be credited to that 
fund for that fiscal year under subsection (c) of such section 7346.
    ``(3) Premiums received by the Department under this subchapter in 
any fiscal year after fiscal year 1997 by reason of the furnishing of 
care and services under a VA health plan to a veteran referred to in 
paragraph (2) shall be credited to the revolving fund established under 
subsection (a) only if the cost of providing such care and services is 
not covered by appropriations. The amount so credited shall be the 
amount of such premiums received that is necessary to cover the 
difference between the cost of such care and services and such 
appropriations.
    ``(c) The Secretary shall establish in the revolving fund a 
separate account for each VA health plan. The Secretary shall credit 
any amount received under subsection (b) by reason of the furnishing of 
care and services in or through a VA health plan or the enrollment of 
an individual with a VA health plan.
    ``(d) Amounts credited to the account of the revolving fund for a 
VA health plan under subsection (b) are hereby made available to the VA 
health plan for the expenses of the delivery by the VA health plan of 
the items and services in the standard benefit package and any 
supplemental health benefits plan offered by the VA health plan.''.
            (2) The table of chapters at the beginning of title 38, 
        United States Code, and at the beginning of part II of such 
        title, is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
        chapter 17 the following new item:

``18. Benefits and Eligibility Under Health Security Act....   1801.''.
    (b) Preservation of Existing Benefits for Facilities Not Operating 
as Health Plans.--(1) Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 1704 the following new section:
``Sec. 1705. Facilities not operating within health plans
    ``The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the 
furnishing of care and services by any facility of the Department when 
it is not operating as or within a health plan certified as a health 
plan under the Health Security Act.''.
    (2) The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1704 the 
following new item:

``1705. Facilities not operating within health plans.''.

SEC. 8103. ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS FACILITIES AS 
              HEALTH PLANS.

    (a) In General.--Chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code, is 
amended--
            (1) by redesignating subchapter IV as subchapter V; and
            (2) by inserting after subchapter III the following new 
        subchapter IV:

 ``SUBCHAPTER IV--PARTICIPATION AS PART OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE REFORM

``Sec. 7341. Organization of health care facilities as health plans
    ``(a)(1) The Secretary may, subject to the availability of 
appropriations, organize health plans and operate Department facilities 
as or within health plans under the Health Security Act.
    ``(2)(A) The Secretary may prescribe regulations establishing 
standards for the operation of Department health care facilities as or 
within health plans under that Act. In prescribing such standards, the 
Secretary shall ensure that they conform, to the extent possible under 
the requirements of section 1821, to the requirements for health plans 
generally set forth in part 1 of subtitle B of title I of the Health 
Security Act.
    ``(B) Not later than 30 days after prescribing such standards, the 
Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives a report describing the 
differences, if any, between such standards and the requirements for 
health plans generally referred to in subparagraph (A).
    ``(b) Health care facilities of the Department located within an 
area or region may be organized to operate as a single health plan 
encompassing all Department facilities within that area or region or 
may be organized to operate as several health plans.
    ``(c) In carrying out responsibilities under the Health Security 
Act, a State (or a State-established entity)--
            ``(1) may not impose any standard or requirement on a VA 
        health plan that is inconsistent with this chapter or any 
        regulation prescribed under this chapter or other Federal laws 
        regarding the operation of this chapter; and
            ``(2) may not deny certification of a VA health plan under 
        the Health Security Act on the basis of a conflict between a 
        rule of a State and this chapter or regulations prescribed 
        under this chapter or other Federal laws regarding the 
        operation of this chapter.
``Sec. 7342. Contract authority for facilities operating as or within 
              health plans
    ``(a) The Secretary shall designate a health plan director for each 
VA health plan organized and operated under this subchapter.
    ``(b) The health plan director of a VA health plan may enter into 
contracts and agreements for the provision of care and services to be 
provided under the VA health plan and contracts and agreements for 
other services (including procurement of equipment, maintenance and 
repair services, and other services related to the provision of health 
care services) consistent with section 1821 of this title.
    ``(c) Contracts and agreements (including leases) under subsection 
(a) shall not be subject to the following provisions of law:
            ``(1) Section 8110(c) of this title, relating to the 
        contracting of services at Department health-care facilities.
            ``(2) Section 8122(a)(1) of this title, relating to the 
        lease of Department property.
            ``(3) Section 8125 of this title, relating to local 
        contracts for the procurement of health-care items.
            ``(4) Section 702 of title 5, relating to the right of 
        review of agency wrongs by courts of the United States.
            ``(5) Sections 1346(a)(2) and 1491 of title 28, relating to 
        the jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States 
        and the United States Court of Federal Claims, respectively, 
        for the actions enumerated in such sections.
            ``(6) Subchapter V of chapter 35 of title 31, relating to 
        adjudication of protests of violations of procurement statutes 
        and regulations.
            ``(7) Sections 3526 and 3702 of such title, relating to the 
        settlement of accounts and claims, respectively, of the United 
        States.
            ``(8) Subsections (b)(7), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of section 
        8 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(b)(7), (e), (f), 
        (g), and (h)), relating to requirements with respect to small 
        businesses for contracts for property and services.
            ``(9) The provisions of law assembled for purposes of 
        codification of the United States Code as section 471 through 
        544 of title 40 that relate to the authority of the 
        Administrator of General Services over the lease and disposal 
        of Federal Government property.
            ``(10) The provisions of the Office of Federal Procurement 
        Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 401 et seq.), relating to the procurement 
        of property and services by the Federal Government.
            ``(11) Chapter 3 of the Federal Property and Administrative 
        Services Act of 1949 (41 U.S.C. 251 et seq.), relating to the 
        procurement of property and services by the Federal Government.
            ``(12) Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76.
    ``(c)(1) Contracts and agreements for the provision of care and 
services under subsection (a) may include any contract or other 
agreement that the health plan director of a VA health plan determines 
is consistent with section 1821 of this title and appropriate in order 
to provide care and services under the VA health plan.
    ``(2) Contracts and agreements under this subsection may be entered 
into without prior review by the Central Office of the Department.
    ``(d)(1) The entry into a contract or agreement under this section 
for services other than the services referred to in subsection (c) 
(including contracts and agreements for procurement of equipment, 
maintenance and repair services, and other services related to the 
provision of health care services) shall not be subject to prior review 
by the Central Office if the contract is consistent with section 1821 
of this title and the amount of the contract or agreement is less than 
$250,000.
    ``(2) The Central Office may conduct a prior review of a contract 
or agreement referred to in paragraph (1) if the amount of the contract 
or agreement is $250,000 or greater.
``Sec. 7343. Resource sharing authority
    ``(a) The Secretary may, consistent with section 1821 of this 
title, enter into agreements under section 8153 of this title with 
other health care plans, with health care providers, and with other 
health industry organizations, and with individuals, for the sharing of 
resources of the Department under a VA health plan.
    ``(b) The Secretary may, consistent with section 1821 of this 
title, enter into agreements with other departments and agencies of the 
Federal Government for the sharing of resources of the Department and 
such departments and agencies in order to provide care and services 
under a VA health plan.
``Sec. 7344. Administrative and personnel flexibility
    ``(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary 
may--
            ``(1) appoint health care personnel to positions in any 
        facility of the Department operating as or within a VA health 
        plan in accordance with such qualifications for such positions 
        as the Secretary may establish; and
            ``(2) promote and advance personnel serving in such 
        positions in accordance with such qualifications as the 
        Secretary may establish.
    ``(b) Subject to the provisions of section 1125 of the Health 
Security Act, the Secretary may carry out appropriate promotional, 
advertising, and marketing activities to inform individuals of the 
availability of VA health plans.
``Sec. 7345. Expenditure authority
    ``(a)(1) To the extent that appropriations are available, the 
director of a VA health plan may expend funds available to a VA health 
plan (including funds available under section 1834(c) of this title, 
funds available under section 7346(d)(2)(B) of this title, and funds 
otherwise made available to the VA health plan by the Secretary) for 
any purpose, and in any amount, that the director determines 
appropriate in order to ensure that the VA health plan meets the 
requirements and the requirements of furnishing care and services to 
veterans under chapter 17 of this title.
    ``(2) Funds may be expended under this subsection in order to cover 
the following costs:
            ``(A) The costs of marketing and advertising under a VA 
        health plan.
            ``(B) The costs of legal services provided to a VA health 
        plan by the General Counsel of the Department.
            ``(C) The costs of acquisition (including acquisition of 
        land), construction, repair, or renovation of facilities.
    ``(3) The exercise by a health plan director of the authority 
provided in paragraph (1) shall not be subject to prior review by the 
Central Office of the Department.
    ``(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to expenditures of funds 
provided to a facility by the Central Office of the Department 
exclusively for the purpose of the provision of the following services:
            ``(1) Services relating to post-traumatic stress disorder.
            ``(2) Services relating to spinal-cord dysfunction.
            ``(3) Services relating to substance abuse.
            ``(4) Services relating to the rehabilitation of blind 
        veterans.
``Sec. 7346. Veterans Health Care Investment Fund
    ``(a) There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United 
States a fund to be known as the Veterans Health Care Investment Fund 
(in this section referred to as the `Fund').
    ``(b) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the 
Department, in addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be 
appropriated to the Department for VA health plans, such amounts as are 
necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury to fulfill the requirement 
of subsection (c).
    ``(c) For each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997, the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall, subject to the availability of appropriated 
funds, credit to the Fund an amount in that fiscal year as follows:
            ``(1) For fiscal year 1995, $1,225,000,000.
            ``(2) For fiscal year 1996, $600,000,000.
            ``(3) For fiscal year 1997, $1,700,000,000.
    ``(d)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), amounts in the Fund shall be 
available to the Secretary only for the VA health plans organized and 
operated under this subchapter.
    ``(2)(A) For each of fiscal years 1996 and 1997, the Secretary 
shall estimate the total amount to be collected or recovered under 
sections 1831, 1832, and 1833 of this title by reason of the provision 
of care and services through VA health plans under chapter 18 of this 
title or the enrollment of individuals in such plans under that 
chapter. The Secretary shall estimate the amount to be so collected or 
recovered with respect to each VA health plan and with respect to all 
VA health plans.
    ``(B) For each such fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available 
to each VA health plan an amount that bears the same relationship to 
the total amount available in the Fund for the fiscal year as the 
amount estimated to be collected or recovered by the VA health plan 
during the fiscal year bears to the total amount estimated to be 
collected or recovered by all VA health plans during that fiscal year.
    ``(e) Not later than March 1, 1997, the Secretary shall submit to 
Congress a report concerning the operation of the Department of 
Veterans Affairs health care system in preparing for, and operating 
under, national health care reform under the Health Security Act during 
fiscal years 1995 and 1996. The report shall include a discussion of--
            ``(1) the adequacy of amounts in the Fund for the operation 
        of VA health plans;
            ``(2) the quality of care provided by such plans; and
            ``(3) the ability of such plans to attract patients.
``Sec. 7347. Funding provisions: grants and other sources of assistance
    ``The Secretary may apply for and accept, if awarded, any grant or 
other source of funding that is intended to meet the needs of special 
populations and that but for this section is unavailable to facilities 
of the Department or to health plans operated by the Government if 
funds obtained through the grant or other source of funding will be 
used through a facility of the Department operating as or within a 
health plan.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 73 is amended by striking out the item relating to the heading 
for subchapter IV and inserting in lieu thereof the following:

 ``Subchapter IV--Participation as Part of National Health Care Reform

``7341. Organization of health care facilities as health plans.
``7342. Contract authority for facilities operating as or within health 
                            plans.
``7343. Resource sharing authority.
``7344. Administrative and personnel flexibility.
``7345. Expenditure authority.
``7346. Veterans Health Care Investment Fund.
``7347. Funding provisions: grants and other sources of assistance.
                ``Subchapter V--Research Corporations''.

            TITLE IX--WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES

SEC. 9000. APPLICATION OF INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.

    (a) In General.--The provisions of subtitle B of title V shall 
apply to the provision of workers compensation medical services 
provided by a health plan or health care provider in the same manner as 
such provisions apply with respect to the provision of services 
included in the standard benefit package.
    (b) Information.--Subject to the provisions of subtitle C of title 
V, health plans and health care providers that render workers 
compensation medical services shall provide to the worker and to the 
workers compensation carrier, the employer or both, as appropriate, 
relevant health care information necessary to assist the worker in the 
safe and timely return to work.
    (c) Compliance With Duties and Requirements.--A health plan to 
which this section applies and its providers shall comply with legal 
duties and reporting requirements under State workers compensation 
laws, and other Federal and State laws, including laws regarding the 
reporting of occupational injuries and diseases.
    (d) Rules.--The Secretary of Labor shall promulgate rules to 
clarify the responsibilities of health plans and health care providers 
in carrying out the provisions referred to in subsection (a).

SEC. 9001. PROVISION OF CARE IN DISPUTED CASES.

    (a) In General.--In cases in which a workers compensation claim is 
challenged by the employer, the workers compensation carrier, or both, 
a health plan shall provide or pay for all medical care included in the 
standard benefit package according to the applicable workers 
compensation fee schedule, if any, until such time as a determination 
is made through the adjudication process that the claim is compensable 
as a workers compensation claim. If such a determination is made, the 
workers compensation carrier (or the employer, if self-insured) shall 
reimburse the health plan (for the cost of services delivered to the 
member for the work-related illness or injury) and the worker (for any 
copayments, deductibles or coinsurance costs incurred for such 
services).
    (b) Applicability.--Subsection (a) shall not apply in a case where 
compensation has been accepted by the insurer or the employer, or paid 
without prejudice.

SEC. 9002. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

    (a) Authorization.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
the Secretary of Labor are authorized to conduct demonstration projects 
under this section in one or more States with respect to treatment of 
work-related injuries and illnesses.
    (b) Development of Work-Related Protocols.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        and the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the States and 
        such experts on work-related injuries and illnesses as each 
        such Secretary finds appropriate, shall develop protocols for 
        the appropriate treatment of work-related conditions.
            (2) Testing of protocols.--The Secretary of Health and 
        Human Services and the Secretary of Labor shall enter into 
        contracts with one or more community-rated health plans to test 
        the validity of the protocols developed under subsection (a).
    (c) Development of Capitation Payment Models.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Labor shall develop, 
using protocols developed under subsection (b) if possible, methods of 
providing for payment by workers compensation carriers to health plans 
on a per case basis, capitated payment for the treatment of specified 
work-related injuries and illnesses.

SEC. 9003. COMMISSION ON WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES.

    (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established a Commission on 
Workers Compensation Medical Services (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the ``Commission'').
    (b) Composition.--
            (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of 15 members 
        appointed in accordance with paragraph (2). Members of the 
        Commission shall include--
                    (A) one or more individuals representing State 
                workers compensation commissioners;
                    (B) one or more individuals representing State 
                workers compensation funds;
                    (C) one or more individuals representing labor 
                organizations;
                    (D) one or more individuals representing employers 
                (other than workers compensation insurance carriers);
                    (E) one or more individuals representing workers 
                compensation insurance carriers;
                    (F) one or more members of the medical profession 
                having expertise in occupational health; and
                    (G) one or more educators or researchers having 
                expertise in the field of occupational health.
        Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
            (2) Appointments.--Members of the Commission shall be 
        appointed by the President and shall include--
                    (A) three members appointed from among individuals 
                recommended by the Speaker of the House of 
                Representatives;
                    (B) three members appointed from among individuals 
                recommended by the Minority Leader of the House of 
                Representatives;
                    (C) three members appointed from among individuals 
                recommended by the Majority Leader of the Senate; and
                    (D) three members appointed from among individuals 
                recommended by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
            (3) No compensation except travel expenses.--Members of the 
        Commission shall serve without compensation, but each member 
        shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
        subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 
        5, United States Code.
    (c) Duties.--
            (1) In general.--The Commission shall study the 
        relationship of workers compensation medical services to the 
        new health system under this Act in terms of impact on the cost 
        of workers compensation medical services, access to appropriate 
        care for injured workers, and quality of medical care and its 
        impact on functional and vocational outcomes for injured 
        workers.
            (2) Evaluation issues to be addressed.--In its 
        deliberations under paragraph (1), the Commission shall 
        consider the following issues in examining the relationship 
        between health plans and workers compensation medical services:
                    (A) The impact of health reform on workers 
                compensation medical costs and premium rates charged to 
                employers for workers compensation insurance.
                    (B) The extent and impact of cost-shifting and 
                price discrimination between the workers compensation 
                medical system and traditional health insurers.
                    (C) The impact of experience rating adjustments 
                resulting from workers compensation medical services on 
                workplace safety.
                    (D) The advantages and disadvantages of maintaining 
                separate financing, payment and delivery systems for 
                workers compensation medical services, including the 
                impact on--
                            (i) the quality of medical care delivered 
                        to workers injured or made ill on the job;
                            (ii) the incentives for employers to 
                        maintain safe work-places; and
                            (iii) workers compensation indemnity 
                        benefit costs, medical costs and the overall 
                        costs of the workers compensation system.
                    (E) The advisability and appropriateness of 
                transferring financial responsibility for some or all 
                workers compensation medical benefits to health plans.
                    (F) The impact of State-to-State variations in 
                medical and rehabilitation benefits on costs, access 
                and quality of care.
                    (G) The options that are available to accomplish 
                the delivery of workers compensation benefits not 
                included in the standard benefit package in integrated 
                systems
                    (H) Whether capitated rates can be developed for 
                workers compensation medical benefits, and the impact 
                of using such rates on medical and indemnity costs, 
                access, and quality of care.
                    (I) The impact of provider choice, with respect to 
                an injured worker, on workers compensation medical 
                costs, wage-loss benefits costs, and quality of care.
    (d) Staff Support.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
the Secretary of Labor shall provide staff support for the Commission.
    (e) Reports.--Not later than October 1, 2000, the Commission shall 
submit a final report on its work to the President, the Committee on 
Labor and Human Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Education 
and Labor of the House of Representatives. Such report shall include a 
recommendation as to whether a transfer of financial responsibility for 
some or all medical benefits to health plans should be effected, and a 
detailed implementation plan should such a transfer be recommended. 
Prior to the submission of the final report, the Commission shall 
submit such interim reports on issues addressed by the Commission as 
the members of the Commission determine to be appropriate.

                       TITLE X--PREMIUM FINANCING

     Subtitle A--National Health Care Cost and Coverage Commission

SEC. 10001. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE COST AND COVERAGE COMMISSION.

    There is established a commission to be known as the National 
Health Care Cost and Coverage Commission (hereafter in this title 
referred to as the ``Commission'').

SEC. 10002. COMPOSITION.

    (a) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members 
appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Members shall 
be appointed not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of 
this Act based on their expertise and national recognition in the 
fields of health economics including insurance practices, health care 
benefit design, health care provider organization and reimbursement, 
and labor markets. In appointing members of the Commission, the 
President shall ensure that no more than 4 members of the Commission 
are affiliated with the same political party.
    (b) Chairperson.--The President shall designate 1 individual 
described in subsection (a) who shall serve as Chairperson of the 
Commission.
    (c) Terms.--
            (1) In general.--The terms of members of the Commission 
        shall be for 6 years to commence on January 1, 1996, except 
        that of the members first appointed, 3 shall be appointed for 
        an initial term of 4 years, 3 shall be appointed for an initial 
        term of 5 years and the chairperson shall be appoint for an 
        initial term of 6 years.
            (2) Continuation in office.--Upon the expiration of a term 
        of office, a member shall continue to serve until a successor 
        is appointed and qualified.
    (d) Vacancies.--
            (1) In general.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be 
        filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but the 
        individual appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve only for 
        the unexpired portion of the term for which the individual's 
        predecessor was appointed.
            (2) No impairment of function.--A vacancy in the membership 
        of the Commission does not impair the authority of the 
        remaining members to exercise all of the powers of the 
        Commission.
            (3) Acting chairperson.--The Commission may designate a 
        member to act as Chairperson during any period in which there 
        is no Chairperson designated by the President.

SEC. 10003. DUTIES OF COMMISSION.

    (a) In General.--The general duties of the Commission are to 
monitor and respond to--
            (1) trends in health care coverage; and
            (2) changes in per-capita premiums and other indicators of 
        health care inflation.
The Commission may be advised by individuals with expertise concerning 
the economic, demographic, and insurance market factors that affect the 
cost and coverage of health insurance.
    (b) Annual Reports.--
            (1) In general.--The Commission shall report to Congress 
        annually on January 1 (beginning in 1997) concerning trends in 
        health care coverage and costs. Such reports shall categorize 
        such information on a national basis, a State by State basis, 
        and a community rating area basis.
            (2) Health care coverage.--For purposes of this title, the 
        term ``health care coverage'' means coverage under--
                    (A) a certified standard health plan providing a 
                standard benefits package or an alternative standard 
                benefits package;
                    (B) the medicare program under title XVIII of the 
                Social Security Act;
                    (C) the medicaid program under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act;
                    (D) the health care program for active military 
                personnel under title 10, United States Code;
                    (E) the veterans health care program under chapter 
                17 of title 38, United States Code;
                    (F) the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the 
                Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS), as defined in section 
                1073(4) of title 10, United States Code;
                    (G) the Indian health service program under the 
                Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1601 et 
                seq.);
                    (H) a State single-payer system approved under 
                subpart B of part 3 of subtitle F of title I; or
                    (I) any governmental health care program for 
                institutionalized individuals.
            (3) Contents of report.--Each report under paragraph (1) 
        shall include the findings of the Commission with respect to 
        the following:
                    (A) Demographics and employment status of the 
                uninsured individuals, and findings on why such 
                individuals are uninsured.
                    (B) Structure of delivery systems.
                    (C) Status of insurance reforms.
                    (D) Development and operation of purchasing 
                cooperatives and other buyer reforms.
                    (E) Success of market and other mechanisms in 
                expanding coverage and controlling health expenditures 
                and premium costs among employers and families.
                    (F) Success of the tax imposed under section 4521 
                of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
                    (G) Success and adequacy of the individual and 
                employer subsidy programs under title VI in expanding 
                coverage through employers and families.
                    (H) Per capita cost of health care, including--
                            (i) the rate of growth in health care costs 
                        categorized by type of health care provider and 
                        type of payor in States and community rating 
                        areas;
                            (ii) the expected rate of growth in per 
                        capita health care costs;
                            (iii) the causes of such growth; and
                            (iv) proposed strategies for controlling 
                        such growth.
                    (I) The percentage of the resident population in 
                the United States, and each State, that has health care 
                coverage.
            (4) Benefits issues.--The Commission shall consult with the 
        National Health Benefits Board in gathering data and in making 
        recommendations concerning issues that effect the standard 
        benefit package.
    (c) Affordability Reports.--
            (1) In general.--As part of each annual report under 
        subsection (b), beginning with the report for 1999, the 
        Commission shall include information on--
                    (A) the affordability of health care coverage for 
                families and employers; and
                    (B) the success of market incentives and other 
                provisions of this Act in achieving health care cost 
                containment.
            (2) Determination and recommendations.--If the Commission 
        determines for any year that health care coverage is 
        unaffordable (as described in paragraph (3)) or that cost 
        containment efforts under this Act are unsuccessful, the 
        Commission shall submit recommendations in the annual report 
        for systematic improvements as provided for in paragraph (4).
            (3) Cost of coverage.--The Commission shall make a 
        determination of unaffordability under paragraph (2) if the 
        Commission finds that, with respect to the year for which the 
        report is submitted, fewer than 35 percent of those eligible to 
        enroll in community-rated health plans were able to enroll in 
        plans with a premium that was at or below the reference premium 
        for the community rating area involved.
            (4) Recommendations.--If the Commission makes a finding 
        under paragraph (3) with respect to any year, the Commission 
        shall recommend to Congress a means of controlling health care 
        costs in order to ensure that the growth in the per capita 
        premium for community-rated plans is at or below the growth in 
        the target per capita premium for the community rating area 
        involved. The Commission may recommend alternative target per 
        capita premium growth if the Commission determines that such 
        alternative would be more appropriate.
            (5) Congressional consideration.--The recommendations of 
        the Commission under paragraph (4) shall be submitted to 
        Congress in the form of an implementing bill which contains 
        such statutory provisions as the Commission determines are 
        necessary or appropriate to implement such recommendations. 
        Such bill shall be considered under the procedures established 
        under section 10004.
    (d) Coverage Trigger.--
            (1) Commission determination.--By January 1, 2000, the 
        Commission shall make a determination as to the percentage of 
        the resident population in the United States, and each State, 
        that has health care coverage.
            (2) Attainment of coverage goal.--
                    (A) In general.--If, under paragraph (1), the 
                Commission determines that health care coverage of at 
                least 95 percent of the resident population in the 
                United States has been attained, the Commission shall 
                submit recommendations (under subparagraph (B)) in its 
                annual report to Congress on January 1, 2000.
                    (B) Recommendation requirement.--The 
                recommendations of the Commission under subparagraph 
                (A) shall include methods to expand health care 
                coverage to those who are not covered. Such 
                recommendations shall address all relevant parties, 
                including States, employers, employees, unemployed and 
                low-income individuals, and public program 
                participants.
            (3) Coverage goal not attained.--
                    (A) In general.--If, under paragraph (1), the 
                Commission determines that health care coverage of at 
                least 95 percent of the resident population in the 
                United States has not been attained by January 1, 2000, 
                the Commission shall submit recommendations (under 
                subparagraph (B)) in its annual report to Congress not 
                later than May 15, 2000.
                    (B) Recommendation requirements.--The 
                recommendations of the Commission under paragraph (1) 
                shall include one or more legislative proposals for 
                expanding health care coverage to cover the remaining 
                uninsured population. Such recommendations shall 
                address all relevant parties, including States, 
                employers, employees, unemployed and low-income 
                individuals, and public program participants.
                    (C) Congressional consideration.--The 
                recommendations of the Commission under subparagraph 
                (A) shall be submitted to Congress in the form of one 
                or more implementing bills which contains such 
                statutory provisions as the Commission determines are 
                necessary or appropriate to implement such 
                recommendations. Such bill shall be considered under 
                the procedures established under section 10004.

SEC. 10004. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS.

    (a) Implementing Bills.--
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an 
        implementing bill described in section 10003(c)(5) or section 
        10003(d)(3)(C) shall be considered by Congress under the 
        procedures for consideration described in subsection (b), 
        except that with respect to an implementing bill described in 
        section 10003(c)(5), the date described in subsection (b)(3) 
        shall not apply.
            (2) GAO consideration.--With respect to an implementing 
        bill described in section 10003(d)(3)(C), to be eligible for 
        Congressional consideration under subsection (b), the General 
        Accounting Office must certify that, if implemented, the 
        legislative proposals in such bill would expand health care 
        coverage to cover the remaining uninsured population.
    (b) Congressional Consideration.--
            (1) Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This 
        subsection is enacted by Congress--
                    (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the 
                House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, 
                and as such is deemed a part of the rules of each 
                House, respectively, but applicable only with respect 
                to the procedure to be followed in that House in the 
                case of an implementing bill described in subsection 
                (a), and supersedes other rules only to the extent that 
                such rules are inconsistent therewith; and
                    (B) with full recognition of the constitutional 
                right of either House to change the rules (so far as 
                relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, 
                in the same manner and to the same extent as in the 
                case of any other rule of that House.
            (2) Introduction and referral.--On the day on which the 
        implementing bill described in subsection (a) is transmitted to 
        the House of Representatives and the Senate, such bill shall be 
        introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the 
        Majority Leader of the House, for himself or herself and the 
        Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the House 
        designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the 
        House and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the 
        Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself or herself and the 
        Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate 
        designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the 
        Senate. If either House is not in session on the day on which 
        the implementing bill is transmitted, the bill shall be 
        introduced in that House, as provided in the preceding 
        sentence, on the first day thereafter on which that House is in 
        session. If the implementing bill is not introduced within 5 
        days of its transmission, any Member of the House and of the 
        Senate may introduce such bill. The implementing bill 
        introduced in the House of Representatives and the Senate shall 
        be referred to the appropriate committees of each House.
            (3) Period for committee consideration.--If the committee 
        or committees of either House to which an implementing bill has 
        been referred have not reported the bill at the close of July 
        1, 2000 (or if such House is not in session, the next day such 
        House is in session), such committee or committees shall be 
        automatically discharged from further consideration of the 
        implementing bill and it shall be placed on the appropriate 
        calendar.
            (4) Floor consideration in the senate.--
                    (A) In general.--Within 5 days after the 
                implementing bill is placed on the calendar, the 
                Majority Leader, at a time to be determined by the 
                Majority Leader in consultation with the Minority 
                Leader, shall proceed to the consideration of the bill. 
                If on the sixth day after the bill is placed on the 
                calendar, the Senate has not proceeded to consideration 
                of the bill, then the presiding officer shall 
                automatically place the bill before the Senate for 
                consideration. A motion in the Senate to proceed to the 
                consideration of an implementing bill shall be 
                privileged and not debatable. An amendment to the 
                motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order 
                to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is 
                agreed to or disagreed to.
                    (B) Time limitation on consideration of bill.--
                            (i) In general.--Debate in the Senate on an 
                        implementing bill, and all amendments and 
                        debatable motions and appeals in connection 
                        therewith, shall be limited to not more than 30 
                        hours. The time shall be equally divided 
                        between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader 
                        and the Minority Leader or their designees.
                            (ii) Debate of amendments, motions, points 
                        of order, and appeals.--In the Senate, no 
                        amendment which is not relevant to the bill 
                        shall be in order. Debate in the Senate on any 
                        amendment, debatable motion or appeal, or point 
                        of order in connection with an implementing 
                        bill shall be limited to--
                                    (I) not more than 2 hours for each 
                                first degree relevant amendment,
                                    (II) one hour for each second 
                                degree relevant amendment, and
                                    (III) 30 minutes for each debatable 
                                motion or appeal, or point of order 
                                submitted to the Senate,
                        to be equally divided between, and controlled 
                        by, the mover and the manager of the 
                        implementing bill, except that in the event the 
                        manager of the implementing bill is in favor of 
                        any such amendment, motion, appeal, or point of 
                        order, the time in opposition thereto, shall be 
                        controlled by the Minority Leader or designee 
                        of the Minority Leader. The Majority Leader and 
                        Minority Leader, or either of them, may, from 
                        time under their control on the passage of an 
                        implementing bill, allot additional time to any 
                        Senator during the consideration of any 
                        amendment, debatable motion or appeal, or point 
                        of order.
                    (C) Other motions.--A motion to recommit an 
                implementing bill is not in order.
                    (D) Final passage.--Upon the expiration of the 30 
                hours available for consideration of the implementing 
                bill, it shall not be in order to offer or vote on any 
                amendment to, or motion with respect to, such bill. 
                Immediately following the conclusion of debate in the 
                Senate on an implementing bill that was introduced in 
                the Senate, such bill shall be deemed to have been read 
                a third time and the vote on final passage of such bill 
                shall occur without any intervening action or debate.
                    (E) Debate on differences between the houses.--
                Debate in the Senate on motions and amendments 
                appropriate to resolve the differences between the 
                Houses, at any particular stage of the proceedings, 
                shall be limited to not more than 5 hours.
                    (F) Debate on conference report.--Debate in the 
                Senate on the conference report shall be limited to not 
                more than 10 hours.
            (5) Floor consideration in the house of representatives.--
                    (A) Proceed to consideration.--On the sixth day 
                after the implementing bill is placed on the calendar, 
                it shall be privileged for any Member to move without 
                debate that the House resolve itself into the Committee 
                of the Whole House on the State of the Union, for the 
                consideration of the bill, and the first reading of the 
                bill shall be dispensed with.
                    (B) General debate.--After general debate, which 
                shall be confined to the implementing bill and which 
                shall not exceed 4 hours, to be equally divided and 
                controlled by the Chairman and Ranking Minority Member 
                of the Committee or Committees to which the bill had 
                been referred, the bill shall be considered for 
                amendment by title under the 5-minute rule and each 
                title shall be considered as having been read. The 
                total time for considering all amendments shall be 
                limited to 26 hours of which the total time for 
                debating each amendment under the 5-minute rule shall 
                not exceed one hour.
                    (C) Rise and report.--At the conclusion of the 
                consideration of the implementing bill for amendment, 
                the Committee of the Whole on the State of the Union 
                shall rise and report the bill to the House with such 
                amendments as may have been adopted, and the previous 
                question shall be considered as ordered on the bill and 
                the amendments thereto, and the House shall proceed to 
                vote on final passage without intervening motion except 
                one motion to recommit.
            (6) Computation of days.--For purposes of this subsection, 
        in computing a number of days in either House, there shall be 
        excluded--
                    (A) the days on which either House is not in 
                session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days 
                to a day certain, or an adjournment of the Congress 
                sine die, and
                    (B) any Saturday and Sunday not excluded under 
                subparagraph (A) when either House is not in session.
            (7) Points of order based on expanding coverage.--
                    (A) In general.--It shall not be in order in the 
                Senate to consider--
                            (i) any bill;
                            (ii) any bill prior to third reading; or
                            (iii) any conference report;
                under the procedures described in this subsection if 
                such bill or conference report has not been certified 
                by the General Accounting Office under subsection 
                (a)(2) as expanding coverage to cover the remaining 
                uninsured.
                    (B) Waiver or suspension.--Subparagraph (A) may be 
                waived or suspended in the Senate only by the 
                affirmative vote of \3/5\ of the members duly chosen 
                and sworn. An affirmative vote of \3/5\ of the members 
                of the Senate duly chosen and sworn shall be required 
                in the Senate to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the 
                chair on a point of order raised under this paragraph.
    (c) Failure to Enact Legislation.--If Congress fails to enact 
legislation with respect to an implementing bill under section 
10003(d)(3)(C) by December 31, 2000, the employer and individual 
premium financing provisions of subtitle B shall become effective on 
January 1, 2002 with respect to those States determined by the 
Commission under 10003(d)(3)(A) to have health care coverage for less 
than 95 percent of the resident populations of each such State.

SEC. 10005. OPERATION OF THE COMMISSION.

    (a) Meetings; Quorum.--
            (1) Meetings.--The Chairperson shall preside at meetings of 
        the Commission, and in the absence of the Chairperson, the 
        Commission shall elect a member to act as Chairperson pro 
        tempore.
            (2) Quorum.--Four members of the Commission shall 
        constitute a quorum thereof.
    (b) Administrative Provisions.--
            (1) Faca not applicable.--The Federal Advisory Committee 
        Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the Commission.
            (2) Pay and travel expenses.--
                    (A) Pay.--Each member of the Commission shall be 
                paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the 
                minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV 
                of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 
                5, United States Code, for each day (including travel 
                time) during which the member is engaged in the actual 
                performance of duties vested in the Commission.
                    (B) Travel expenses.--Members of the Commission 
                shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in 
                lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 
                and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
            (3) Executive director.--
                    (A) In general.--The Commission shall, without 
                regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States 
                Code, appoint an Executive Director.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director shall be paid at a 
                rate equivalent to a rate for the Senior Executive 
                Service.
            (4) Staff.--
                    (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
                (C), the Executive Director, with the approval of the 
                Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional 
                personnel.
                    (B) Pay.--The Executive Director may make such 
                appointments without regard to the provisions of title 
                5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
                competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may 
                be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 
                and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, 
                relating to classification and General Schedule pay 
                rates, except that an individual so appointed may not 
                receive pay in excess of 120 percent of the annual rate 
                of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
                    (C) Detailed personnel.--Upon request of the 
                Executive Director, the head of any Federal department 
                or agency may detail any of the personnel of that 
                department or agency to the Commission to assist the 
                Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
            (5) Other authority.--
                    (A) Contract services.--The Commission may procure 
                by contract, to the extent funds are available, the 
                temporary or intermittent services of experts or 
                consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United 
                States Code.
                    (B) Leases and property.--The Commission may lease 
                space and acquire personal property to the extent funds 
                are available.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary for the operation of the 
Commission.

Subtitle B--Employer and Individual Premium Requirements and Assistance

SEC. 10101. APPLICATION OF SUBTITLE.

    (a) In General.--The provisions of the subtitle shall apply as 
provided in section 10003(c).
    (b) Application With Respect To Individuals.--
            (1) Lawful residents.--
                    (A) In general.--This subtitle shall only apply 
                with respect to an individual who is residing in a 
                State involved and who is--
                            (i) a citizen or national of the United 
                        States; or
                            (ii) an alien permanently residing in the 
                        United States under color of law (as defined in 
                        subparagraph (B)).
                    (B) Alien permanently residing in the united states 
                under color of law.--The term ``alien permanently 
                residing in the United States under color of law'' 
                means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
                residence (within the meaning of section 101(a)(20) of 
                the Immigration and Nationality Act), and includes any 
                of the following:
                            (i) An alien who is admitted as a refugee 
                        under section 207 of the Immigration and 
                        Nationality Act.
                            (ii) An alien who is granted asylum under 
                        section 208 of such Act.
                            (iii) An alien whose deportation is 
                        withheld under section 243(h) of such Act.
                            (iv) An alien who is admitted for temporary 
                        residence under section 210, 210A, or 245A of 
                        such Act.
                            (v) An alien who has been paroled into the 
                        United States under section 212(d)(5) of such 
                        Act for an indefinite period or who has been 
                        granted extended voluntary departure as a 
                        member of a nationality group.
                            (vi) An alien who is the spouse or 
                        unmarried child under 21 years of age of a 
                        citizen of the United States, or the parent of 
                        such a citizen if the citizen is over 21 years 
                        of age, and with respect to whom an application 
                        for adjustment to lawful permanent residence is 
                        pending.
            (2) Individual responsibilities.--With respect to a State 
        to which this subtitle applies, each individual described in 
        paragraph (1)(A)--
                    (A) must enroll in (or be covered under) a health 
                plan for the individual, and
                    (B) must pay any premium required, consistent with 
                this Act, with respect to such enrollment.
            (3) Individuals covered under equivalent health care 
        programs.--This subtitle shall not apply with respect to an 
        individual covered under an equivalent health care program.
            (4) Equivalent health care program.--As used in paragraph 
        (1), the term ``equivalent health care program'' means--
                    (A) part A or part B of the medicare program under 
                title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
                    (B) the medicaid program under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act,
                    (C) the health care program for active military 
                personnel under title 10, United States Code,
                    (D) the veterans health care program under chapter 
                17 of title 38, United States Code,
                    (E) the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the 
                Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS), as defined in section 
                1073(4) of title 10, United States Code,
                    (F) the Indian health service program under the 
                Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1601 et 
                seq.), and
                    (G) a State single-payer system approved by the 
                Secretary under subpart B of part 3 of subtitle F.
            (5) Inmates.--This subtitle shall not apply with respect to 
        an individual who is an inmate of a public institution (except 
        as a patient of a medical institution).
            (6) Exemption.--
                    (A) In general.--The requirements of this subtitle 
                shall not apply with respect to an individual granted a 
                qualified religious exemption.
                    (B) Qualified religious exemption.--
                            (i) In general.--The term `qualified 
                        religious exemption' means an exemption granted 
                        by the Secretary to an individual--
                                    (I) who is a member of a recognized 
                                religious sect or division thereof with 
                                respect to which such Secretary makes 
                                the findings referred to in 
                                subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) of 
                                section 1402(g)(1) of the Internal 
                                Revenue Code of 1986,
                                    (II) who is an adherent of 
                                established tenets or teachings of such 
                                sect or division as described in such 
                                section, and
                                    (III) who submits an application 
                                for such exemption which contains or is 
                                accompanied by the evidence described 
                                in section 1402(g)(1)(A) of such Act 
                                and a waiver described in section 
                                1402(g)(1)(B) of such Act.
                    (C) Limitation.--An exemption granted under this 
                paragraph shall cease to apply beginning on the date 
                such Secretary determines that the individual, or the 
                sect or division, ceased to meet the requirements of 
                subparagraph (B).

SEC. 10102. DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this title:
            (1) Full-time equivalent employees; part-time employees.--
                    (A) In general.--A qualifying employee who is 
                employed by an employer--
                            (i) for at least 120 hours in a month, is 
                        counted as 1 full-time equivalent employee for 
                        the month and shall be deemed to be employed on 
                        a full-time basis, or
                            (ii) for at least 40 hours, but less than 
                        120 hours, in a month, is counted as a fraction 
                        of a full-time equivalent employee in the month 
                        equal to the full-time employment ratio (as 
                        defined in subparagraph (B)) for the employee 
                        and shall be deemed to be employed on a part-
                        time basis.
                    (B) Full-time employment ratio defined.--The term 
                ``full-time employment ratio'' means, with respect to a 
                qualifying employee of an employer in a month, the 
                lesser of 1 or the ratio of--
                            (i) the number of hours of employment such 
                        employee is employed by such employer for the 
                        month, to
                            (ii) 120 hours.
                    (C) Full-time employee.--The term ``full-time 
                employee'' means, with respect to an employer, an 
                employee who is employed on a full-time basis (as 
                specified in subparagraph (A)) by the employer.
                    (D) Part-time employee.--The term ``part-time 
                employee'' means, with respect to an employer, an 
                employee who is employed on a part-time basis (as 
                specified in subparagraph (A)) by the employer.
                    (E) Consideration of industry practice.--As 
                provided under rules established by the Secretary of 
                Labor, an employee who is not described in subparagraph 
                (C) or (D) shall be considered to be employed on a 
                full-time or part-time basis by an employer (and to be 
                a full-time or part-time employee of an employer) for a 
                month (or for all months in a 12-month period) if the 
                employee is employed by that employer on a continuing 
                basis that, taking into account the structure or nature 
                of employment in the industry, represents full or part-
                time employment in that industry.
                    (F) Qualifying employee.--
                            (i) The term ``qualifying employee'' means, 
                        with respect to an employer for a month, an 
                        employee who is employed by the employer for at 
                        least 40 hours in the month, subject to the 
                        limitation set forth in clause (ii).
                            (i) The term qualifying employee shall not 
                        include, with respect to an employer for a 
                        month, an employee of a nonelecting employer.
            (2) Family adjusted income.--
                    (A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, the 
                term ``family adjusted income'' means, with respect to 
                a family, the sum of the adjusted incomes (as defined 
                in subparagraph (B)) for all members of the family.
                    (B) Adjusted income.--In subparagraph (A), the term 
                ``adjusted income'' means, with respect to an 
                individual, adjusted gross income (as defined in 
                section 62(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986)--
                            (i) determined without regard to sections 
                        135, 162(l), 911, 931, and 933 of such Code, 
                        and
                            (ii) increased by the amount of interest 
                        received or accrued by the individual which is 
                        exempt from tax.
                    (C) Presence of additional dependents.--At the 
                option of an individual, a family may include (and not 
                be required to separate out) the income of other 
                individuals who are claimed as dependents of the family 
                for income tax purposes, but such individuals shall not 
                be counted as part of the family for purposes of 
                determining the size of the family.
            (3) Nonenrolling employee.--The term ``nonenrolling 
        employee'' means an employee of an employer who does not enroll 
        in a health plan offered by the employer.
            (4) Reference premium.--The term ``reference premium'' 
        means the reference premium established under section 4512 of 
        the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
            (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
        of Labor.
            (6) Self-employed individual.--The term ``self-employed 
        individual'' means, for a year, an individual who has net 
        earnings (as defined in section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue 
        Code of 1986) from self-employment for the year.
            (7) Weighted average premium.--The term ``weighted average 
        premium'' has the same meaning given such term in section 
        6002(b)(1)(C).

                   PART 1--EMPLOYER PREMIUM PAYMENTS

SEC. 10111. OBLIGATION.

    (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, a 
contributing employer (as defined in subsection (b)) shall make health 
care coverage premium payments on behalf of the qualifying employees of 
the employer in accordance with this subtitle.
    (b) Contributing Employer.--As used in subsection (a), the term 
``contributing employer'' means an employer that--
            (1) employs, on average, 25 or more employees; or
            (2) employs less than 25 employees that elects under 
        subsection (c) to be a contributing employee.
    (c) Election.--
            (1) In general.--An employer that does not meet the 
        requirements of subsection (b) may elect to be treated as a 
        community-rated employer under the procedures to be developed 
        by the Secretary.
            (2) Community-rated employer.--An exempt employer shall be 
        treated as a community-rated employer as of the first date of 
        the first year following an election made under paragraph (1).
            (3) Self-employed.--A self-employed individual that does 
        not employ at least one full-time employee may not make an 
        election under paragraph (1).

SEC. 10112. COMMUNITY-RATED EMPLOYERS.

    (a) Requirement.--
            (1) In general.--Each community-rated contributing employer 
        for a month shall pay at least an amount equal to the sum 
        across all qualifying employees of the amount specified in 
        subsection (b) for each such qualifying employee of the 
        employer. Such payments shall be made in accordance with 
        standards established by the Secretary.
            (2) Treatment of certain employment by experience-rated 
        employers.--An experience-rated employer shall be deemed, for 
        purposes of this subtitle, to be a community-rated employer 
        with respect to qualifying employees who are not experience 
        rate eligible individuals.
    (b) Premium Payment Amount.--
            (1) General rule.--The amount of the employer premium 
        payment under subsection (a) for a month for each qualifying 
        employee of the employer who is residing in a community rating 
        area, shall be equal to the sum of--
                    (A) 50 percent of the weighted average premium of 
                the purchasing cooperative through which the employer 
                offered health plan coverage with respect to each such 
                employee in such area; and
                    (B) the employer collection shortfall add-on 
                described in paragraph (2).
            (2) Employer collection shortfall add-on.--The employer 
        collection shortfall add-on for a month for each qualifying 
        employee of the employer residing in a community rating area 
        shall be equal to 50 percent of the amount described in section 
        10134 with respect to each such employee.
            (3) Part-time employees.--With respect to a part-time 
        employee, the payment required under paragraph (1) (and the 
        add-on described in paragraph (2)) shall be based on a pro-
        rated share (to be established by the Secretary) of the 
        weighted average premium of the purchasing cooperative involved 
        (or, with respect to the shortfall add-on, the amount described 
        in paragraph (2)).

SEC. 10113. EXPERIENCE RATED EMPLOYERS.

    (a) Requirement.--Each experience-rated employer that in a month 
employs a qualifying employee who is--
            (1) enrolled in an experienced-rated health plan sponsored 
        by the employer, shall provide for a payment toward the premium 
        for the plan for such employee in an amount specified under 
        subsection (b); or
            (2) is not so enrolled, shall make employer premium 
        payments with respect to such employee in an amount that is 
        equal to 50 percent of the weighted average premium (for the 
        applicable class of family enrollment) of the community rating 
        area in which the employee resides.
    (b) Premium Payment Amount.--
            (1) General rule.--The amount of the experience rated 
        employer premium payment under subsection (a)(1) for a month 
        for each qualifying employee of the employer, shall be equal to 
        50 percent of the weighted average premium of the health plans 
        offered by the employer.
            (2) Self-insured plans.--In the case of a self-insured 
        health plan, the amount of the premium payment under subsection 
        (a) shall be equal to the premium equivalent of the self-
        insured health plan.
            (3) Part-time employees.--With respect to a part-time 
        employee, the payment required under paragraph (1) shall be a 
        pro-rated share (to be established by the Secretary) of the 
        amount described in subsection (a)(2).
            (4) Premium areas.--An experience-rated plan sponsor 
        employer may, based on regulations promulgated by the 
        Secretary, establish premium areas. Experience rated employers 
        may base their payments under this section on the weighted 
        average premium of the health plans offered in such premium 
        areas.

                PART 2--FAMILY PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITIES

                        Subpart A--Family Share

SEC. 10131. ENROLLMENT AND PREMIUM PAYMENTS.

    (a) Requirement.--Each family enrolled in a community-rated health 
plan or in a experienced-rated health plan in a class of family 
enrollment is responsible for payment of the family share of premium 
payable respecting such enrollment. Such premium may be paid by an 
employer or other person on behalf of such a family.
    (b) Family Share of Premium Defined.--In this part, the term 
``family share of premium'' means, with respect to enrollment of a 
family--
            (1) in a community-rated health plan, the amount specified 
        in section 10132(a) for the class; or
            (2) in an experienced-rated health plan, the amount 
        specified in section 10132(b) for the class.

SEC. 10132. FAMILY SHARE OF PREMIUMS.

    (a) Community-Rated Health Plans.--
            (1) In general.--The family share of premiums for a family 
        enrolled in a community-rated health plan based on a class of 
        family enrollment shall equal the sum of the base amounts 
        described in paragraph (2) reduced (but not below zero) by the 
        sum of the amounts described in paragraph (3).
            (2) Base.--The base amounts described in this paragraph 
        (for a plan for a class of enrollment) are--
                    (A) the applicable premium specified in section 
                10133(a) with respect to such class of enrollment;
                    (B) 50 percent of the applicable collection 
                shortfall add-on (computed under section 10134 for such 
                class); and
                    (C) any applicable marketing fee as described in 
                section 1112(f).
            (3) Credits and discounts.--The amounts described in this 
        paragraph (for a plan for a class of enrollment) are--
                    (A) the amount of the family credit under section 
                10135(a); and
                    (B) the amount of any premium discount provided 
                under section 10136(a)(1).
    (b) Experience-Rated Health Plans.--
            (1) In general.--The family share of premiums for a family 
        enrolled in an experience-rated health plan based on a class of 
        family enrollment shall equal the premium described in 
        paragraph (2) reduced (but not below zero) by the sum of the 
        amounts described in paragraph (3).
            (2) Premium.--The premium described in this paragraph (for 
        a plan for a class of enrollment) is the applicable plan 
        premium specified in section 10133(b) with respect to the plan 
        and class of enrollment involved.
            (3) Credits and discounts.--The amounts described in this 
        paragraph (for a plan for a class of enrollment) are--
                    (A) the amount of the family credit under section 
                10135(a); and
                    (B) the amount of any premium discount provided 
                under section 10136(a).
            (4) Multistate employers.--For purposes of this subsection, 
        the Secretary shall establish alternative contribution rules 
        for multistate self-insured employers.

SEC. 10133. AMOUNT OF PREMIUM.

    (a) Community-Rated Plans.--The amount of the applicable premium 
charged by a community-rated health plan for all families in a class of 
family enrollment under a community-rated health plan offered in the 
health care coverage area is equal to the product of--
            (1) the final community rate for the plan; and
            (2) the premium class factor established by the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Service for that class under subpart D of 
        part 1 of subtitle E of title I;
increased for any applicable plan marketing fees (described in section 
1112(f)) and purchasing cooperative membership fees (described in 
section 1324).
    (b) Reference to Other Premiums.--The amount of the premium charged 
by an experience-rated employer for all families in a class of family 
enrollment under an experience-rated health plan is specified under 
section 10113.

SEC. 10134. COLLECTION SHORTFALL ADD-ON.

    (a) In General.--The collection shortfall add-on for a community 
rating area for a class of enrollment for a year, is a per enrollee 
amount (determined under rules developed by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services), adjusted proportionately by the premium class factors 
described in section 10133(a)(2), such that the total of the adjusted 
per enrollee amounts in the community rating area equals the aggregate 
collection shortfall as determined under subsection (b).
    (b) Aggregate Collection Shortfall.--
            (1) In general.--Each State shall estimate, for each 
        community rating area for each year (beginning with the first 
        year for which this section applies) the total amount of 
        payments which the State can reasonably identify as owed to 
        community-rated health plans under this Act for the year and 
        not likely to be collected during a period specified by the 
        Secretary beginning on the first day of the year.
            (2) Exclusion of government debts.--The amount under 
        paragraph (1) shall not include any payments owed to a 
        community-rated health plan by the Federal, State, or local 
        governments.
            (3) Adjustment for previous shortfall estimation 
        discrepancy.--The amount estimated under this subsection for a 
        year shall be adjusted to reflect over (or under) estimations 
        in the amounts so computed under this subsection for previous 
        years (based on actual collections), taking into account 
        interest payable based upon borrowings (or savings) 
        attributable to such over or under estimations.

SEC. 10135. FAMILY CREDIT.

    (a) In General.--The credit provided under this section for a 
family enrolled through an employer in a community-rated or experience-
rated plan for a class of family enrollment is equal to the amount of 
the minimum employer premium payment required under part 1 with respect 
to the family.
    (b) Family Not Enrolled Through Employer.--The credit provided 
under this section for a family that is not enrolled in a community-
rated or experience-rated plan through an employer for a class of 
family enrollment is equal to 50 percent of the premium of the plan in 
which the family is enrolled. In no case shall such amount exceed the 
weighted average premium in the community rating area involved.

SEC. 10136. PREMIUM SUBSIDY.

    (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, each 
family enrolled with a community-rated or experience-rated plan is 
entitled to a premium discount under this section, in the amount 
specified in subsection (b)(1).
    (b) Amount of Premium Discount.--
            (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding paragraphs of 
        this subsection, the amount of the premium discount under this 
        subsection for a family under a class of family enrollment is 
        equal to--
                    (A) 50 percent of the lesser of--
                            (i) the weighted average premium for 
                        community-rated plans offered in the community-
                        rating area involved, increased by any amount 
                        provided under paragraph (2); or
                            (ii)(I) in the case of a family enrolled 
                        through a community-rated employer, the 
                        weighted average premium for the purchasing 
                        cooperative through which the family obtains 
                        coverage; or
                            (II) in the case of a family enrolled 
                        through an experience-rated employer, the 
                        weighted average premium for the premium area 
                        of the health plans offered by the employer; 
                        less
                    (B) the sum of--
                            (i) the family obligation amount described 
                        in subsection (c); and
                            (ii) the amount of any voluntary employer 
                        payment (not required under part 1) towards the 
                        family share of premiums for covered members of 
                        the family.
            (2) Increase for community-rated families to assure 
        enrollment in at-or-below-average-cost plan.--In the case of a 
        family enrolled in a community-rated plan, if a State 
        determines that a family eligible for a discount under this 
        section is unable to enroll in an at-or-below-average-cost plan 
        (as defined in paragraph (3)) that serves the area in which the 
        family resides, the amount of the premium discount under this 
        subsection is increased to the extent that such amount will 
        permit the family to enroll in a community-rated plan without 
        the need to pay a family share of premium under this part in 
        excess of the sum described in paragraph (1)(B).
            (3) At-or-below-average-cost plan defined.--In this 
        section, the term ``at-or-below-average-cost plan'' means a 
        community-rated plan the premium for which does not exceed, for 
        the class of family enrollment involved, the weighted average 
        premium for the community-rating area.
    (c) Family Obligation Amount.--
            (1) Determination.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the 
        family obligation amount under this subsection is determined as 
        follows:
                    (A) No obligation if income below income threshold 
                amount.--If the family adjusted income of the family is 
                less than the income threshold amount (specified in 
                paragraph (4)), the family obligation amount is zero.
                    (B) Income above income threshold amount.--If such 
                income is at least such income threshold amount, the 
                family obligation amount is the sum of the following:
                            (i) For income (above income threshold 
                        amount) up to the poverty level.--The product 
                        of the initial marginal rate for the applicable 
                        class of family enrollment (specified in 
                        paragraph (2)) and the amount by which--
                                    (I) the family adjusted income (not 
                                including any portion that exceeds the 
                                applicable poverty level for the class 
                                of family involved), exceeds;
                                    (II) such income threshold amount.
                            (ii) Graduated phase out of discount up to 
                        200 percent of poverty level.--The product of 
                        the final marginal rate for the applicable 
                        class of family enrollment (specified in 
                        paragraph (2)) and the amount by which the 
                        family adjusted income exceeds 100 percent (but 
                        is less than 200 percent) of the applicable 
                        poverty level.
            (2) Marginal rates.--In paragraph (1), for a year:
                    (A) Initial marginal rate.--The initial marginal 
                rate is the ratio of--
                            (i) 4 percent of the applicable poverty 
                        level for the class of enrollment involved for 
                        the year; to
                            (ii) the amount by which such poverty level 
                        exceeds such income threshold amount.
                    (B) Final marginal rate.--The final marginal rate 
                is 12 percent.
            (3) Limitation to 8 percent for all families.--
                    (A) In general.--In no case shall the family 
                obligation amount under this subsection for the year 
                exceed 8 percent of the adjusted income of the family.
                    (B) Families above 200 percent of poverty.--With 
                respect to a family with a family adjusted income that 
                exceeds 200 percent of the applicable poverty level, 
                the family obligation amount shall be equal to 8 
                percent of such family adjusted income.
            (4) Income threshold amount.--
                    (A) In general.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
                income threshold amount specified in this paragraph is 
                $1,000 (adjusted under subparagraph (B)).
                    (B) Indexing.--For the 1-year period beginning on 
                January 1, 1995, the income threshold amount specified 
                in subparagraph (A) shall be increased or decreased by 
                the same percentage as the percentage increase or 
                decrease by which the average CPI for the 12-month-
                period ending with August 31 of the preceding year 
                exceeds such average for the 12-month period ending 
                with August 31. 1993.
                    (C) Rounding.--Any increase or decrease under 
                subparagraph (B) for a year shall be rounded to the 
                nearest multiple of $10.

SEC. 10137. NO LOSS OF COVERAGE.

    In no case shall the failure to pay amounts owed under this Act 
result in an individual's or family's loss of coverage.

        Subpart B--Payment of Family Credit by Certain Families

SEC. 10141. PAYMENT OF FAMILY CREDIT BY NONWORKING AND PART-TIME 
              CERTAIN FAMILIES.

    Subject to the limitations described in section 10142, a family 
with an employer contribution for a month that is less than the family 
credit amount described in section 10135, shall be liable for payment 
of an amount equal to the family credit amount less any employer 
contributions for the family for the month.

SEC. 10142. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY BASED ON INCOME.

    (a) In General.--In the case of an eligible family described in 
subsection (b), the repayment amount required under section 10141 with 
respect to a year shall not exceed the amount of liability described in 
subsection (c) for the year.
    (b) Eligible Family Described.--An eligible family described in 
this subsection is a family which is determined by the State for the 
community rating area in which the family resides, to have wage-
adjusted income (as defined in subsection (d)) below 200 percent of the 
applicable poverty level.
    (c) Amount of Liability.--
            (1) Determination.--Subject to subsection (f), in the case 
        of a family enrolled in a class of enrollment with wage-
        adjusted income (as defined in subsection (d)), the amount of 
        liability under this subsection is determined as follows:
                    (A) No obligation if income below income threshold 
                amount.--If such income is less than the income 
                threshold amount (specified in section 10136(c)(4)), 
                the amount of liability is zero.
                    (B) Income above income threshold amount.--If such 
                income is at least such income threshold amount, the 
                amount of liability is the sum of the following:
                            (i) Initial marginal rate.--The initial 
                        marginal rate (specified in paragraph (2)(A)) 
                        of the amount by which--
                                    (I) the wage-adjusted income (not 
                                including any portion that exceeds the 
                                applicable poverty level for the class 
                                of family involved), exceeds
                                    (II) such income threshold amount.
                            (ii) Final marginal rate.--Where wage-
                        adjusted income exceeds 100 percent of the 
                        applicable poverty level, the final marginal 
                        rate (specified in paragraph (2)(B)) of the 
                        amount by which the wage-adjusted income 
                        exceeds 100 percent of the applicable poverty 
                        level.
            (2) Marginal rates.--In paragraph (1)--
                    (A) Initial marginal rate.--The initial marginal 
                rate, for a year for a class of enrollment, is the 
                ratio of--
                            (i) 4 percent of the applicable poverty 
                        level for the class of enrollment for the year, 
                        to
                            (ii) the amount by which such poverty level 
                        exceeds such income threshold amount.
                    (B) Final marginal rate.--The final marginal rate, 
                for a year for a class of enrollment, is the ratio of--
                            (i) the amount by which (I) 50 percent of 
                        the weighted average premium in the community 
                        rating area (for the class and year) exceeds 
                        (II) 4 percent of applicable poverty level (for 
                        the class and year); to
                            (ii) 100 percent of such poverty level.
    (d) Wage-Adjusted Income Defined.--In this subtitle, the term 
``wage-adjusted income'' means, for a family, family adjusted income of 
the family, reduced by the sum of the following:
            (1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the amount of any wages 
        included in such family's income that is received for 
        employment which is taken into account in the computation of 
        the amount of employer premiums under part 1.
            (B) The reduction under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed 
        for a year $5,000 (adjusted under section 10136(c)(3)(B)) 
        multiplied by the number of months (including portions of 
        months) of employment with respect to which employer premiums 
        were payable under part 1.
            (2) The amount of unemployment compensation included in 
        income under section 85 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
    (e) Determinations.--A family's wage-adjusted income and the amount 
of liability under subsection (c) shall be determined by the State upon 
application by a family.

            TITLE XI--ENSURING HEALTH CARE REFORM FINANCING

SEC. 11001. ENSURING HEALTH CARE REFORM FINANCING.

    (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to ensure that the 
enactment of this Act does not result in unanticipated increases in the 
Federal deficit.
    (b) Legal Entitlements Contingent.--Any entitlement provided by 
this Act, including those to premium assistance, shall be subject to 
the operation of this section.
    (c) Determination of Unfinanced Health Spending.--
            (1) Initial health care baseline.--Not later than the date 
        that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
        President shall, using up-to-date estimates, issue an order 
        setting forth the initial health care baseline for fiscal year 
        1995 and for each subsequent fiscal year through 2004, which 
        shall consist of estimates (for each year) projecting the 
        following:
                    (A) total direct spending outlays resulting from 
                this Act and under the Medicare and Medicaid programs; 
                and
                    (B) total revenues resulting from this Act.
            (2) President's budget to include a current health care 
        baseline.--When the President submits the budget for fiscal 
        year 1997 (as required by section 1105 of title 31), and for 
        each fiscal year through 2004, the President shall include--
                    (A) a current health care baseline (as specified in 
                paragraph (3)) with respect to the current fiscal year, 
                the budget year, and the 4 following fiscal years; and
                    (B) an estimate of the difference between the 
                current health care baseline and the initial health 
                care baseline for the current fiscal year, the budget 
                year, and the 4 following fiscal years.
            (3) Current health care baseline.--The current health care 
        baseline shall, for the applicable fiscal year, consist of--
                    (A) updated spending and revenue amounts contained 
                in the initial projection (as set forth in paragraph 
                (1)); plus or minus
                    (B) other outlays or revenue changes contained in 
                legislation enacted after the date of enactment of this 
                Act offsetting outlays or revenues resulting from this 
                Act.
            (4) Comparing initial and current health care baselines.--
        Once OMB has determined the difference between the initial and 
        current health care baselines, OMB shall remove from that 
        difference any health care variable not attributable either to 
        this Act or to any legislation described in paragraph (3)(B).
    (d) Offsetting Unfinanced Health Spending.--
            (1) Requirement for sequestration to fully offset 
        unfinanced health spending.--If the President's budget includes 
        a determination that the current health care baseline exceeds 
        the initial health care baseline pursuant to subsection 
        (c)(2)(B) for the budget year and the current fiscal year by 
        more than $10,000,000,000 in total, such determination shall be 
        accompanied by a proposed order to become effective on October 
        1 of that calendar year which fully offsets in the budget year 
        and the following fiscal year the sum of such excess (for the 
        budget year and the current fiscal year) in the manner provided 
        in this subsection. Such proposed order shall be accompanied by 
        such proposed regulations as the President deems necessary to 
        carry out the sequester.
            (2) Offsets.--
                    (A) In general.--The offsets required by this 
                subsection shall be accomplished through a combination 
                of--
                            (i) subject to the provisions of 
                        subparagraph (B), in the case of the premium 
                        assistance program, reducing the percentages 
                        otherwise in effect for the fiscal year under 
                        subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 
                        6002(a)(2);
                            (ii) adjusting the deductible for Medicare 
                        drugs as provided in section 1834(d)(1)(B)(i) 
                        of the Social Security Act; and
                            (iii) reducing each direct spending program 
                        provided in the Act by a uniform percentage,
                to the extent (subject to paragraph (3)) necessary to 
                accomplish all of the sequestrations necessary to fully 
                offset the amounts required for that fiscal year.
                    (B) Eligibility percentage for pregnant women and 
                children reduced last.--Any reduction under 
                subparagraph (A)(i)--
                            (i) shall be made first by reducing the 
                        percentages under section 6002(a)(2)(A); and
                            (ii) to the extent sufficient offsets may 
                        not be made under subparagraph (A), shall then 
                        be made by reducing the percentages under 
                        section 6002(a)(2) (B) and (C).
            (3) Proportionality.--The President shall apply the offset 
        mechanisms provided in paragraph (2)(A) (i), (ii), and (iii) 
        proportionally (based on the ratio of the outlays caused by 
        each program to the total outlays of all sequesterable programs 
        under paragraph (2)(A)), to the extent possible, in the budget 
        year and the following fiscal year, but in no case shall the 
        total amount of offsets be less than the amount required by 
        paragraph (1).
            (4) Effective period.--For purposes of a fiscal year not 
        subject to an order under this section following a fiscal year 
        subject to an order under this section, this Act and the 
        amendments made by this Act shall be assumed to continue as if 
        the order had not been issued.
            (5) Consultation.--The President shall confer with the 
        National Health Benefits Board and the National Health Care 
        Cost and Coverage Commission in carrying out this subsection.
    (e) Final Sequester Determination.--Using the same economic and 
technical assumptions as used in making the preliminary determination 
under subsection (c), the President shall reestimate the current health 
care baselines on September 15 based on legislation in effect as of 
September 10. If the aggregate difference between the initial and 
updated baseline is more than $10,000,000,000 in the current fiscal 
year and budget year combined, the President shall issue a final order 
(and accompanying final regulations) following the procedure set forth 
in subsection (d).
    (f) Suspension in the Event of War or Low Growth.--
            (1) Low growth.--The President shall not issue either a 
        proposed or final order under this section if the Office of 
        Management and Budget notifies the Congress that--
                    (A) during the period consisting of the quarter 
                during which such notification is given, the quarter 
                preceding such notification, and the 4 quarters 
                following such notification, the Office of Management 
                and Budget has determined that real economic growth is 
                projected or estimated to be less than zero with 
                respect to each of any 2 consecutive quarters within 
                such period; or
                    (B) the most recent of the Department of Commerce's 
                advance preliminary or final reports of actual real 
                economic growth indicate that the rate of real economic 
                growth for each of the most recently reported quarter 
                and the immediately preceding quarter is less than 1 
                percent.
            (2) War.--The President shall not issue either a proposed 
        or final order under this section if a declaration of war is in 
        effect.
    (g) Recommendations for Alternative Reductions.--If the President's 
budget for a fiscal year is accompanied by an order under subsection 
(d)(1), the National Health Benefits Board shall, within a reasonable 
time, transmit to the President, the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, and the President of the Senate a report including 
alternative proposals to offset the projected excess set forth in 
subsection (c)(4).
    (h) GAO Audit of Reductions.--If the President has issued an order 
under subsection (d)(1), the General Accounting Office shall report to 
Congress, as soon thereafter as possible following the date of 
transmittal of the President's budget, an analysis of whether the order 
has fully complied with the requirements of this section.
    (i) Additional OMB Reporting Requirements To Be Included in 
President's Budget.--
            (1) Adjusted estimate of total Federal health care costs.--
                    (A) In general.--When the President submits the 
                budget for fiscal year 1997, and each fiscal thereafter 
                through 2004, the President shall include an estimate 
                of total Federal health care costs as described in 
                subparagraph (B).
                    (B) Total federal health care costs.--Total Federal 
                health care costs are--
                            (i) Federal spending in the current health 
                        care baseline (as determined under subsection 
                        (c)(3)); plus
                            (ii) discretionary health care spending 
                        on--
                                    (I) the health care program for 
                                active military personnel under title 
                                10, United States Code;
                                    (II) the veterans health care 
                                program under chapter 17 of title 38, 
                                United States Code;
                                    (III) the Civilian Health and 
                                Medical Program of the Uniformed 
                                Services (CHAMPUS), as defined in 
                                section 1073(4) of title 10, United 
                                States Code;
                                    (IV) the Federal Employee Health 
                                Benefit Plan under chapter 89 of title 
                                5, United States Code (FEHB); and
                                    (V) the Indian health service 
                                program under the Indian Health Care 
                                Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1601 et 
                                seq.).
            (2) Cost as a percent of total revenues.--The President 
        shall include with the estimate required by this subsection a 
        calculation by OMB of the percentage of personal and corporate 
        income taxes needed to pay for total Federal health care costs, 
        as adjusted by this subsection, in excess of dedicated health 
        revenues. OMB shall assume that all dedicated health revenues 
        resulting from amendments made by this Act will be allocated 
        for total Federal health care costs, as adjusted by this 
        subsection.
    (j) Additional Commission Reporting Requirements.--Effective 
beginning in 1997, the National Health Care Commission shall report 
annually on how health care expenses are being financed. Among other 
things, this report shall include--
            (1) how much is spent annually in premiums, out-of-pocket 
        expenses, and third party expenses; and
            (2) the number of businesses that provide health insurance 
        and a profile of businesses that do not provide health 
        insurance, including the earnings of such businesses.

[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 5293 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






117th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 5293

 To provide for the designation of areas as Health Enterprise Zones to 
 reduce health disparities and improve health outcomes in such areas, 
                        and for other purposes.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                           December 19, 2022

  Mr. Padilla introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
                  referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
 To provide for the designation of areas as Health Enterprise Zones to 
 reduce health disparities and improve health outcomes in such areas, 
                        and for other purposes.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Enterprise 
Zones Act of 2022''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Designation of Health Enterprise Zones.
Sec. 3. Consultation.
Sec. 4. Tax incentives.
Sec. 5. Grants.
Sec. 6. Student loan repayment program.
Sec. 7. Incentive payments for Medicare part B items and services 
                            furnished in Health Enterprise Zones.
Sec. 8. Reporting.
Sec. 9. Definitions.
Sec. 10. Authorization of appropriations.

SEC. 2. DESIGNATION OF HEALTH ENTERPRISE ZONES.

    (a) Designation.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, pursuant to 
        applications submitted under subsection (c), designate areas as 
        Health Enterprise Zones to reduce health disparities and 
        improve health outcomes in such areas.
            (2) Eligibility of area.--To be designated as a Health 
        Enterprise Zone under this section, an area shall--
                    (A) be a contiguous geographic area in one census 
                tract or ZIP Code;
                    (B) have measurable and documented racial, ethnic, 
                or geographic health disparities and poor health 
                outcomes, demonstrated by--
                            (i) average income below 150 percent of the 
                        Federal poverty line;
                            (ii) a rate of participation in the special 
                        supplemental nutrition program under section 17 
                        of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 
                        1786) that is higher than the national average 
                        rate of participation in such program;
                            (iii) lower life expectancy than the 
                        national average;
                            (iv) a higher percentage of instances of 
                        low birth weight than the national average; or
                            (v) designation under section 332 of the 
                        Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e) as a 
                        health professional shortage area; and
                    (C) be part of a metropolitan statistical area or 
                micropolitan statistical area identified by the 
                Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
    (b) Solicitation of Applications.--The Secretary shall--
            (1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
        this Act, solicit applications under subsection (c); and
            (2) publish on the website of the Department of Health and 
        Human Services--
                    (A) the names of all applicants under subsection 
                (c), together with the names of each applicant's 
                coalition partners; and
                    (B) a description of all areas proposed to be 
                designated as Health Enterprise Zones.
    (c) Submission of Applications.--To seek the designation of an area 
as a Health Enterprise Zone, a community-based nonprofit organization 
or local governmental agency, in coalition with an array of health care 
providers, hospitals, nonprofit community health clinics, health 
centers, social service organizations, and other related organizations, 
shall submit an application to the Secretary.
    (d) Contents.--An application under subsection (c) shall--
            (1) include an effective and sustainable plan with respect 
        to the area proposed for designation--
                    (A) to reduce health disparities;
                    (B) to reduce the costs of, or to produce savings 
                to, the health care system;
                    (C) to improve health outcomes; and
                    (D) to utilize one or more of the incentives 
                established pursuant to section 4, 5, or 6 of this Act, 
                or section 1833(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
                U.S.C. 1395l(a)), as amended by section 7 of this Act, 
                to address health care provider capacity, improve 
                health services delivery, effectuate community 
                improvements, or conduct outreach and education 
                efforts; and
            (2) identify specific diseases or indicators of health for 
        improvement of health outcomes in such area, including at least 
        one of the following:
                    (A) Cardiovascular disease.
                    (B) Asthma.
                    (C) Diabetes.
                    (D) Dental health.
                    (E) Behavioral health.
                    (F) Maternal and birth health.
                    (G) Sexually transmitted infections.
                    (H) Obesity.
    (e) Considerations.--The Secretary--
            (1) shall consider geographic diversity, among other 
        factors, in selecting areas for designation as Health 
        Enterprise Zones; and
            (2) may conduct outreach efforts to encourage a 
        geographically diverse pool of applicants, including for 
        designating Health Enterprise Zones in rural areas.
    (f) Priority.--In selecting areas for designation as Health 
Enterprise Zones, the Secretary shall give higher priority to 
applications based on the extent to which an area demonstrates the 
following:
            (1) Support from, and participation of, key stakeholders in 
        the public and private sectors in the area proposed for 
        designation, including residents and local governments of such 
        area.
            (2) A plan for long-term funding and sustainability.
            (3) Supporting funds from the private sector.
            (4) Integration with any applicable State health 
        improvement process or plan.
            (5) A plan for evaluation of the impact of designation of 
        such area as a Health Enterprise Zone.
            (6) A plan to utilize existing State tax credits, grants, 
        or other incentives to reduce health disparities and improve 
        health outcomes in the proposed Health Enterprise Zone.
            (7) Such other factors as the Secretary determines are 
        appropriate to demonstrate a commitment to reduce health 
        disparities and improve health outcomes in such area.
    (g) Period of Designation.--The designation under this section of 
an area as a Health Enterprise Zone shall be in effect until the date 
that is 10 years after the date on which the first such area is so 
designated.

SEC. 3. CONSULTATION.

    The Secretary shall carry out this Act in consultation with--
            (1) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; and
            (2) the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health.

SEC. 4. TAX INCENTIVES.

    (a) Work Opportunity Credit for Hiring Health Enterprise Zone 
Workers.--
            (1) In general.--Section 51(d)(1) of the Internal Revenue 
        Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of 
        subparagraph (I), by striking the period at the end of 
        subparagraph (J) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the 
        end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(K) a qualified Health Enterprise Zone worker, to 
                the extent that the qualified first-year wages with 
                respect to such worker are paid for qualified Health 
                Enterprise Zone work.''.
            (2) Qualified health enterprise zone worker.--Section 51(d) 
        of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(16) Health enterprise zones.--
                    ``(A) Qualified health enterprise zone worker.--The 
                term `qualified Health Enterprise Zone worker' means 
                any individual who is certified by the designated local 
                agency as having (as of the hiring date) a principal 
                place of employment within a Health Enterprise Zone.
                    ``(B) Qualified health enterprise zone work.--The 
                term `qualified Health Enterprise Zone work' means 
                employment by a Health Enterprise Zone practitioner, 
                the primary official duties of which promote access to 
                healthcare in a Health Enterprise Zone.
                    ``(C) Related terms.--For purposes of this 
                paragraph, the terms `Health Enterprise Zone' and 
                `Health Enterprise Zone practitioner' have the same 
                meaning given such terms under section 9 of the Health 
                Enterprise Zones Act of 2022.''.
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act to individuals who begin work for the 
        employer after such date.
    (b) Credit for Health Enterprise Zone Workers.--
            (1) In general.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of 
        chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by 
        section 13402 of Public Law 117-169, is amended by inserting 
        after section 25E the following new section:

``SEC. 25F. CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED HEALTH ENTERPRISE ZONE WORKERS.

    ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a qualified Health 
Enterprise Zone worker, there shall be allowed as a credit against the 
tax imposed by this chapter for a taxable year an amount equal to 40 
percent of wages received for qualified Health Enterprise Zone work 
during such taxable year.
    ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
            ``(1) Qualified health enterprise zone worker.--The term 
        `qualified Health Enterprise Zone worker' means, with respect 
        to wages, an individual whose principal place of employment 
        while earning such wages is within a Health Enterprise Zone (as 
        such term is defined in section 9 of the Health Enterprise 
        Zones Act of 2022).
            ``(2) Qualified health enterprise zone work.--The term 
        `qualified Health Enterprise Zone work' has the same meaning 
        given such term in section 51(d)(16)(B).''.
            (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subpart 
        A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code, as 
        amended by section 13402(d) of Public Law 117-169, is amended 
        by inserting after the item relating to section 25E the 
        following new item:

``Sec. 25F. Credit for qualified Health Enterprise Zone workers.''.
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
        shall apply to wages received after the date of the enactment 
        of this Act.

SEC. 5. GRANTS.

    (a) Authorization.--For each area designated under section 2 as a 
Health Enterprise Zone, the Secretary may award a grant to the 
community-based nonprofit organization or local governmental agency 
that applied for such designation to support such applicant and its 
coalition partners in reducing health disparities and improving health 
outcomes in such area.
    (b) Use of Funds.--Programs and activities funded through a grant 
under this section shall be consistent with the grantee's plan 
submitted pursuant to section 2(d)(1) and may include the following:
            (1) Subgrants to health care practitioners.--
                    (A) In general.--For the purpose of improving or 
                expanding the delivery of health care in the respective 
                Health Enterprise Zone, the grantee may award subgrants 
                to Health Enterprise Zone practitioners to defray costs 
                related to innovative strategies listed in paragraph 
                (2).
                    (B) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a 
                subgrant pursuant to subparagraph (A), a Health 
                Enterprise Zone practitioner shall--
                            (i) own or lease a health care facility in 
                        the Health Enterprise Zone; or
                            (ii) provide health care in such a 
                        facility.
                    (C) Amount.--The amount of a subgrant under 
                subparagraph (A) may not exceed the lesser of--
                            (i) $5,000,000; or
                            (ii) 50 percent of the costs of the 
                        equipment, or capital or leasehold 
                        improvements.
            (2) Innovative strategies.--A grantee (or subgrantee) may 
        use a grant received under this section (or a subgrant received 
        under paragraph (1)) to implement innovative public health 
        strategies in the respective Health Enterprise Zone, which 
        strategies may include--
                    (A) internships and volunteer opportunities for 
                students who reside in the Health Enterprise Zone;
                    (B) funding resources to improve health care 
                provider capacity to serve non-English speakers;
                    (C) operation of medical, mental and behavioral 
                health, and dental mobile clinics;
                    (D) provision of transportation to and from medical 
                appointments for patients;
                    (E) funding resources to improve access to healthy 
                food, recreation, and high-quality housing;
                    (F) capital or leasehold improvements to a health 
                care facility in the respective Health Enterprise Zone; 
                and
                    (G) medical or dental equipment to be used in such 
                a facility.

SEC. 6. STUDENT LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall carry out a loan repayment 
program under which the Secretary enters into agreements with eligible 
Health Enterprise Zone practitioners to make payments on the principal 
and interest of the eligible educational loans of such practitioners 
for each year such practitioners agree to provide health care services 
in a Health Enterprise Zone.
    (b) Limitations.--In entering into loan repayment agreements under 
this section, the Secretary may not agree to--
            (1) make payments for more than 10 years with respect to a 
        practitioner; or
            (2) pay more than $10,000 per year, or more than a total of 
        $100,000, with respect to a practitioner.
    (c) Ineligibility for Double Benefits.--No borrower may, for the 
same service, receive a reduction of loan obligations or a loan 
repayment under both--
            (1) this section; and
            (2) any federally supported loan forgiveness program, 
        including under section 338B, 338I, or 846 of the Public Health 
        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254l-1, 254q-1, 297n), or section 428J, 
        428L, 455(m), or 460 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
        U.S.C. 1078-10, 1078-12, 1087e(m), 1087j).
    (d) Definitions.--In this section:
            (1) The term ``eligible educational loan'' means any 
        federally funded or guaranteed student loan, as determined 
        appropriate by the Secretary in coordination with the Secretary 
        of Education.
            (2) The term ``eligible Health Enterprise Zone 
        practitioner'' means a Health Enterprise Zone practitioner 
        who--
                    (A) agrees to provide health care services in a 
                Health Enterprise Zone for a specified period that is 
                not less than one year; and
                    (B) has one or more eligible educational loans.

SEC. 7. INCENTIVE PAYMENTS FOR MEDICARE PART B ITEMS AND SERVICES 
              FURNISHED IN HEALTH ENTERPRISE ZONES.

    Section 1833(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(ee) Incentive Payments for Items and Services Furnished in 
Health Enterprise Zones.--
            ``(1) In general.--In the case of items and services 
        furnished under this part in an area that is designated as a 
        Health Enterprise Zone section 2(a)(1) of the Health Enterprise 
        Zones Act of 2022, in addition to the amount of payment that 
        would otherwise be made for such items and services under this 
        part, there also shall be paid (on a monthly or quarterly 
        basis) an amount equal to 10 percent of the payment amount for 
        the item or service under this part.
            ``(2) Coordination with other payments.--The amount of the 
        additional payment for an item or a service under this 
        subsection and subsection (m) shall be determined without 
        regard to any additional payment for the item or service under 
        subsection (m) and this subsection, respectively. The amount of 
        the additional payment for an item or a service under this 
        subsection and subsection (z) shall be determined without 
        regard to any additional payment for the item or service under 
        subsection (z) and this subsection, respectively.''.

SEC. 8. REPORTING.

    (a) In General.--Not later than the day that is 10 years after the 
first Health Enterprise Zone is designated under section 2(a)(1), the 
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation of 
this Act (and the amendments made by this Act) and the results thereof.
    (b) Contents.--Each report under subsection (a) shall--
            (1) specify the number and types of incentives provided 
        pursuant to this Act in each Health Enterprise Zone designated 
        under section 2; and
            (2) include evidence of the extent to which the incentives 
        utilized by each Health Enterprise Zone have succeeded--
                    (A) in attracting health care practitioners to 
                practice in Health Enterprise Zones;
                    (B) in reducing health disparities and improving 
                health outcomes in Health Enterprise Zones; and
                    (C) in reducing health costs and hospital 
                admissions and readmissions in Health Enterprise Zones.

SEC. 9. DEFINITIONS.

    In this Act:
            (1) The term ``Health Enterprise Zone'' means an area 
        designated under section 2 as a Health Enterprise Zone.
            (2) The term ``Health Enterprise Zone practitioner'' means 
        a health care practitioner who--
                    (A) is licensed or certified in accordance with 
                applicable State law to treat patients in the 
                respective Health Enterprise Zone;
                    (B) provides--
                            (i) primary care, which may include 
                        obstetrics, gynecological services, pediatric 
                        services, or geriatric services;
                            (ii) behavioral health services, which may 
                        include mental health or substance use disorder 
                        services; or
                            (iii) dental services; and
                    (C) is a participating provider of services or 
                supplier under the Medicare program under title XVIII 
                of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) or 
                a participating provider under a State plan under title 
                XIX of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
            (3) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services.

SEC. 10. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    To carry out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated such 
sums as may be necessary for the period beginning on the date of 
enactment of this Act and ending on the last day of the 10-year period 
that begins on the date on which the first Health Enterprise Zone is 
designated under section 2(a)(1).

[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 5551 Introduced in House (IH)]







106th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                H. R. 5551

     To provide access to affordable health care for all Americans.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                            October 25, 2000

Mr. Dingell (for himself, Mr. Waxman, Mr. Green of Texas, Mr. Pallone, 
Mr. Brown of Ohio, Mr. Stark, and Mr. Conyers) introduced the following 
         bill; which was referred to the Committee on Commerce

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
     To provide access to affordable health care for all Americans.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Basic Access to 
Secure Health Insurance Coverage Health Plan (BASIC Health Plan) Act''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
     TITLE I--AFFORDABLE HEALTH INSURANCE FOR PARENTS AND CHILDREN

Sec. 101. Coverage of parents and children under the medicaid program 
                            and CHIP.
Sec. 102. Coverage of legal immigrants under the medicaid program.
Sec. 103. Coverage of children through age 20 under the medicaid 
                            program and title XXI.
Sec. 104. Application of simplified title XXI procedures under the 
                            medicaid program.
Sec. 105. Expansion of basic services required for benchmark-equivalent 
                            coverage under CHIP.
Sec. 106. Elimination of 100 hour rule and other AFDC-related 
                            eligibility restrictions.
Sec. 107. Limitations on conflicts of interest.
Sec. 108. Demonstration programs to improve medicaid and CHIP outreach 
                            to homeless individuals and families.
         TITLE II--ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CARE FOR ALL AMERICANS

Sec. 201. Extension of coverage to single individuals.
                    TITLE III--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. Availability of unsubsidized coverage.

     TITLE I--AFFORDABLE HEALTH INSURANCE FOR PARENTS AND CHILDREN

SEC. 101. COVERAGE OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM 
              AND CHIP.

    (a) Requirement To Provide Coverage for Medicaid Participation.--
Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is 
amended--
            (1) in paragraph (64), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (2) in paragraph (65), by striking the period and inserting 
        a semicolon; and
            (3) by inserting after paragraph (65), the following new 
        paragraph:
            ``(66) provide that the State will provide medical 
        assistance under paragraph (10)(A)(ii)((XVIII) or health 
        coverage under section 2111 for families described in 
        subsection (k)(1) in accordance with the conditions described 
        in subsection (k)(2).''.
    (b) Coverage Under Medicaid.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
                (XVI);
                    (B) by adding ``or'' at the end of subclause 
                (XVII); and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following new 
                subclause:
                                    ``(XVIII) who are families 
                                described in subsection (k)(1);''.
            (2) Conditions for coverage.--Section 1902 of such Act is 
        further amended by inserting after subsection (j) the following 
        new subsection:
    ``(k)(1) The families described in this paragraph are families 
(consisting of individuals who are under 21 years of age and parents of 
such individuals)--
            ``(A) who are not otherwise eligible for medical assistance 
        under subsection(a)(10)(A); and
            ``(B) whose income is at least--
                    ``(i) with respect to fiscal year 2001, 200 percent 
                of the poverty line; and
                    ``(ii) with respect to each subsequent fiscal year, 
                300 percent of the poverty line.
    ``(2) The conditions described in this paragraph are as follows:
            ``(A) The State provides that families described in 
        paragraph (1) remain eligible for medical assistance for a 
        period (of at least 12 months) following the eligibility 
        determination required under such paragraph.
            ``(B) The State has a State child health plan under title 
        XXI which (whether implemented under such title or under this 
        title) does not limit the acceptance of applications for 
        families described in paragraph (1), does not use a waiting 
        list for such families who meet eligibility standards to 
        qualify for assistance (under this title or under title XXI), 
        and provides benefits to all families in the State who apply 
        for and meet eligibility standards.
            ``(C) The State does not cover families described in 
        paragraph (1) with higher family income without covering 
        families with a lower family income.
    ``(3) In the case of a parent in a family described in paragraph 
(1) who is also the parent of a child who is eligible and enrolled for 
medical assistance under this title or for child health assistance 
under title XXI, the State may elect (on a uniform basis) to enroll the 
parent in the same program as the child. If such a parent has children 
enrolled under both programs, the State may elect (on such basis) which 
program to enroll the parent in.''.
    ``(4) In this subsection, the term `parent' has the meaning given 
the term `caretaker' for purposes of carrying out section 1931.''.
            (3) Application of presumptive eligibility provisions.--
        Section 1920A of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1a) is amended by 
        adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(e) In accordance with regulations, a State shall apply the 
previous provisions of this section to provide for a period of 
presumptive eligibility for medical assistance for a parent of a child 
with respect to whom such a period is provided under this section.''.
            (4) Conforming amendments.--
                    (A) Eligibility categories.--Section 1905(a) of 
                such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended in the matter 
                before paragraph (1)--
                            (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause 
                        (x);
                            (ii) by inserting ``or'' at the end of 
                        clause (xi); and
                            (iii) by inserting after clause (xi) the 
                        following new clause:
            ``(xii) who are families described in section 
        1902(k)(1),''.
                    (B) Income limitations.--Section 1903(f)(4) of such 
                Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)) is amended by inserting 
                ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII),'' after 
                ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVI),''.
    (c) Coverage Under CHIP.--
            (1) In general.--Title XXI of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et 
        seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
        section:

``SEC. 2111. COVERAGE OF FAMILIES.

    ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
title, with respect to a State that does not provide medical assistance 
under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) for families described in 
section 1902(k)(1), the State shall provide health coverage under this 
title for such families through an amendment to its State child health 
plan under section 2102 in accordance with this section and the 
conditions described in section 1902(k)(2).
    ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
            ``(1) Health coverage.--The term `health coverage' has the 
        meaning given the term child health assistance in section 
        2110(a) as if any reference to targeted low-income children 
        were a reference to families described in section 1902(k)(1).
            ``(2) Treatment of pregnant women as parents.--A State 
        child health plan shall treat a pregnant woman who is not 
        otherwise a parent as a parent in a family described in section 
        1902(k)(1) for purposes of this section.
    ``(c) References to Terms and Special Rules.--In the case of, and 
with respect to, a State providing health coverage for families 
described in section 1902(k)(1) under subsection (a), the following 
special rules apply:
            ``(1) Any reference in this title (other than subsection 
        (b)) to a targeted low-income child is deemed to include a 
        reference to a family described in section 1902(k)(1).
            ``(2) Any such reference to child health assistance with 
        respect to such families is deemed a reference to health 
        coverage (as defined in subsection (b)(1)).
            ``(3) In applying section 2103(e)(3)(B) in the case of a 
        family provided coverage under this section, the limitation on 
        total annual aggregate cost-sharing shall be applied to the 
        entire family.
            ``(4) Section 1905(u)(2)(A) shall be applied as if any 
        reference to optional targeted low-income children includes a 
        reference to a family described in section 1902(k)(1).''.
            (2) Enhanced matching funds.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 1905 of such Act (42 
                U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
                            (i) in the fourth sentence of subsection 
                        (b), by striking ``or subsection (u)(3)'' and 
                        inserting ``, (u)(3), or (u)(4)''; and
                            (ii) in subsection (u)--
                                    (I) by redesignating paragraph (4) 
                                as paragraph (5), and
                                    (II) by inserting after paragraph 
                                (3) the following new paragraph:
    ``(4) For purposes of subsection (b) and section 2105(a)(1):
            ``(A) Families.--The expenditures described in this 
        subparagraph are the following:
                    ``(i) Families.--Expenditures for medical 
                assistance made available under section 
                1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) for families described in 
                section 1902(k)(1), the income of which exceeds the 
                income level applicable under such section 1931 to a 
                family of the size involved as of January 1, 2000.
                    ``(ii) Certain pregnant women.--Expenditures for 
                medical assistance for pregnant women under section 
                1902(l)(1)(A) in a family the income of which exceeds 
                the income level applicable under section 1902(l)(2)(A) 
                to a family of the size involved as of January 1, 
                2000.''.
                    (B) Post fy 2006 expansion of availability of 
                enhanced match under medicaid for pre-chip 
                expansions.--Effective October 1, 2005, paragraph (4) 
                of section 1905(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(u)), as 
                inserted by subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), is amended--
                            (i) by amending clause (ii) of subparagraph 
                        (A) to read as follows:
                    ``(ii) Certain pregnant women.--Expenditures for 
                medical assistance for pregnant women under section 
                1902(l)(1)(A) in a family the income of which exceeds 
                the 133 percent of the income official poverty line.''; 
                and
                            (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
                        subparagraphs:
            ``(B) Parents with income above 100 percent of poverty but 
        below january 1, 2000 income level.--The expenditures described 
        in this subparagraph are expenditures for medical assistance 
        made available for any parents described in section 
        1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII), whose income exceeds 100 percent of 
        the income official poverty line applicable to a family of the 
        size involved but does not exceed the applicable income level 
        established under this title (under section 1931 or otherwise) 
        for a parent in a family of the size involved as of January 1, 
        2000.
            ``(C) Children in families with income above medicaid 
        mandatory level not previously described.--The expenditures 
        described in this subparagraph are expenditures (other than 
        expenditures described in paragraph (2) or (3)) for medical 
        assistance made available to any child who is eligible for 
        assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A) and the income of whose 
        family exceeds the minimum income level required under 
        subsection 1902(l)(2) for a child of the age involved (treating 
any child who is 19 or 20 years of age as being 18 years of age).''.
            (3) Transformation of chip into permanent entitlement.--
                    (A) Elimination of allotments and capped 
                appropriations.--Section 2104 of the Social Security 
                Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 2104. APPROPRIATION.

    ``For the purpose of making payments to States under this title, 
there is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and 
each fiscal year thereafter.''.
                    (B) Conforming amendments.--
                            (i) Section 1905 of the Social Security Act 
                        (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
                                    (I) in subsection (b), in the 
                                fourth sentence, by striking ``, and 
                                that do not exceed the amount of the 
                                State's allotment under section 2104 
                                (not taking into account reductions 
                                under section 2104(d)(2)) for the 
                                fiscal year reduced by the amount of 
                                any payments made under section 2105 to 
                                the State from such allotment for such 
                                fiscal year''; and
                                    (II) by striking subsection (u)(1) 
                                and inserting the following:
    ``(u)(1) The condition described in this paragraph for a State plan 
is that the State is complying with the requirement of section 
2105(d)(1).''.
                            (ii) Section 2105(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                        1397ee(a)) is amended by striking ``from its 
                        allotment under section 2104 (taking into 
                        account any adjustment under section 
                        2104(d)),''.
            (4) No cost-sharing for pregnancy-related benefits.--
        Section 2103(e)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(e)(2)) is 
        amended--
                    (A) in the heading, by inserting ``and pregnancy-
                related services'' after ``preventive services''; and
                    (B) by inserting before the period at the end the 
                following: ``and for pregnancy-related services''.
            (5) Conforming amendment relating to no waiting period for 
        certain women.--Section 2102(b)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1397bb(b)(1)(B)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``, and'' at the end of clause (i) 
                and inserting a semicolon;
                    (B) by striking the period at the end of clause 
                (ii) and inserting ``; and''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
                            ``(iii) may not apply a waiting period 
                        (including a waiting period to carry out 
                        paragraph (3)(C)) in the case of targeted low-
                        income women who are pregnant.''.
            (6) Automatic enrollment of children born to title xxi 
        parents.--Section 2102(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1397bb(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new subparagraph:
                    ``(C) Automatic eligibility of children born to a 
                parent being provided health coverage.--Such 
                eligibility standards shall provide for automatic 
                coverage of a child born to an individual who is 
                provided health coverage (as defined in section 
                2111(b)(1)) under this title in the same manner as 
                medical assistance would be provided under section 
                1902(e)(4) to a child described in such section.''.
            (7) Application of presumptive eligibility.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 2107(e)(1) of such Act (42 
                U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end 
                the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(D) Sections 1920 and 1920A (relating to 
                presumptive eligibility).''.
                    (B) Exception from limitation on administrative 
                expenses.--Section 2105(c)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1397ee(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
                following new subparagraph:
                    ``(C) Exception for presumptive eligibility 
                expenditures.--The limitation under subparagraph (A) on 
                expenditures shall not apply to expenditures 
                attributable to the application of section 1920A 
                (pursuant to section 2107(e)(1)(D)), regardless of 
                whether the child is determined to be ineligible for 
                the program under this title or title XIX.''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2000.

SEC. 102. COVERAGE OF LEGAL IMMIGRANTS UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.

    (a) Medicaid Program.--Section 1903(v) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396b(v)) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and 
        inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (4)''; and
            (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
    ``(4)(A) A State shall (through a plan amendment under this title) 
provide medical assistance under this title, notwithstanding sections 
401(a), 402(b), 403, and 421 of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, for aliens who are lawfully 
residing in the United States (including battered aliens described in 
section 431(c) of such Act) and who are otherwise eligible for such 
assistance.
    ``(B) No debt may be accrued under an affidavit of support against 
any sponsor of an alien provided medical assistance under subparagraph 
(A).''.
    (b) Title XXI.--Section 2107(e)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397gg(e)(1)), as amended by section 101(c)(7)(A), is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(E) Section 1903(v)(4) (relating to optional 
                coverage of categories of lawfully residing alien 
                children and parents).''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2000, and apply to medical assistance furnished on 
or after such date.

SEC. 103. COVERAGE OF CHILDREN THROUGH AGE 20 UNDER THE MEDICAID 
              PROGRAM AND TITLE XXI.

    (a) Medicaid.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1902(l)(1)(D) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(l)(1)(D)) is amended by striking 
        ``19'' and inserting ``20''.
            (2) Conforming amendments.--
                    (A) Section 1902(e)(3)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1396a(e)(3)(A)) is amended by striking ``18'' and 
                inserting ``20''.
                    (B) Section 1902(e)(12) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1396a(e)(12)) is amended by striking ``19'' and 
                inserting ``20''.
                    (C) Section 1920A(b)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1396r-1a(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``19'' and 
                inserting ``20''.
                    (D) Section 1928(h)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1396s(h)(1)) is amended by striking ``18'' and 
                inserting ``20''.
                    (E) Section 1932(a)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                1396u-2(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``19'' and 
                inserting ``20''.
    (b) Title XXI.--Section 2110(c)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397jj(c)(1)) is amended by striking ``19'' and inserting ``20''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2000, and apply to medical assistance and child 
health assistance provided on or after such date.

SEC. 104. APPLICATION OF SIMPLIFIED TITLE XXI PROCEDURES UNDER THE 
              MEDICAID PROGRAM.

    (a) Application Under Medicaid.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1902(l) of the Social Security Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 1396a(l)) is amended--
                    (A) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``subject to 
                paragraph (5)'', after ``Notwithstanding subsection 
                (a)(17),''; and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following new 
                paragraph:
    ``(5) With respect to determining the eligibility of individuals 
under 20 years of age for medical assistance under subsection 
(a)(10)(A) and, separately, with respect to determining the eligibility 
of individuals for medical assistance under subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) or (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII), notwithstanding any other 
provision of this title, if the State has established a State child 
health plan under title XXI--
            ``(A) the State may not apply a resource standard if the 
        State does not apply such a standard under such child health 
        plan with respect to such individuals;
            ``(B) the State shall use the same simplified eligibility 
        form (including, if applicable, permitting application other 
        than in person) as the State uses under such State child health 
        plan with respect to such individuals;
            ``(C) the State shall provide for initial eligibility 
        determinations and redeterminations of eligibility using the 
        same verification policies, forms, and frequency as the State 
        uses for such purposes under such State child health plan with 
        respect to such individuals; and
            ``(D) the State shall not require a face-to-face interview 
        for purposes of initial eligibility determinations and 
        redeterminations unless the State requires such an interview 
        for such purposes under such child health plan with respect to 
        such individuals.''.
            (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
        apply to determinations of eligibility made on or after the 
        date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
        Act.
    (b) Additional Entities Qualified To Determine Medicaid Presumptive 
Eligibility for Low-income Children.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1920A(b)(3)(A)(i) of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396r-1a(b)(3)(A)(i)) is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or (II)'' and inserting ``, 
                (II)''; and
                    (B) by inserting ``eligibility of a child for 
                medical assistance under the State plan under this 
                title, or eligibility of a child for child health 
                assistance under the program funded under title XXI, 
                (III) is an elementary school or secondary school, as 
                such terms are defined in section 14101 of the 
                Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
                U.S.C. 8801), an elementary or secondary school 
                operated or supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
                a State or tribal child support enforcement agency, a 
                child care resource and referral agency, an 
                organization that is providing emergency food and 
                shelter under a grant under the Stewart B. McKinney 
                Homeless Assistance Act, or a State or tribal office or 
                entity involved in enrollment in the program under this 
                title, under part A of title IV, under title XXI, or 
                that determines eligibility for any assistance or 
                benefits provided under any program of public or 
                assisted housing that receives Federal funds, including 
                the program under section 8 or any other section of the 
                United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 et 
                seq.), or under the Native American Housing Assistance 
                and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101 et 
                seq.), or (IV) any other entity the State so deems, as 
                approved by the Secretary'' before the semicolon.
            (2) Technical amendments.--Section 1920A of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396r-1a) is amended--
                    (A) in subsection (b)(3)(A)(ii), by striking 
                ``paragraph (1)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraph 
                (2)(A)''; and
                    (B) in subsection (c)(2), in the matter preceding 
                subparagraph (A), by striking ``subsection (b)(1)(A)'' 
                and inserting ``subsection (b)(2)(A)''.
            (3) Application to presumptive eligibility for pregnant 
        women under medicaid.--Section 1920(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396r-1(b)) is amended by adding at the end after and below paragraph 
(2) the following flush sentence:
``The term `qualified provider' includes a qualified entity as defined 
in section 1920A(b)(3).''.
    (c) Automatic Reassessment of Eligibility for Title XXI and 
Medicaid Benefits for Children Losing Medicaid or Title XXI 
Eligibility.--
            (1) Loss of medicaid eligibility.--Section 1902(a) of the 
        Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by section 
        101(a), is amended--
                    (A) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
                (66) and inserting ``; and'', and
                    (B) by inserting after paragraph (66) the following 
                new paragraph:
            ``(67) provide, by not later than the first day of the 
        first month that begins more than 1 year after the date of the 
        enactment of this paragraph and in the case of a State with a 
        State child health plan under title XXI, that before medical 
        assistance to a child (or a parent of a child) is discontinued 
        under this title, a determination of whether the child (or 
        parent) is eligible for benefits under title XXI shall be made 
        and, if determined to be so eligible, the child (or parent) 
        shall be automatically enrolled in the program under such title 
        without the need for a new application.''.
            (2) Loss of title xxi eligibility.--Section 2102(b)(3) (42 
        U.S.C. 1397bb(b)(3)) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs 
        (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively, and by 
        inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
        subparagraph:
                    ``(D) that before child health assistance to a 
                child (or health coverage to a parent of a child) is 
                discontinued under this title, a determination of 
                whether the child (or parent) is eligible for benefits 
                under title XIX is made and, if determined to be so 
                eligible, the child (or parent) is automatically 
                enrolled in the program under such title without the 
                need for a new application;''.
            (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1) 
        and (2) apply to individuals who lose eligibility under the 
        medicaid program under title XIX, or under a State child health 
        insurance plan under title XXI, respectively, of the Social 
        Security Act on or after the date that is 60 days after the 
        date of the enactment of this Act.
    (d) Provision of Medicaid and CHIP Applications and Information 
Under the School Lunch Program.--Section 9(b)(2)(B) of the Richard B. 
Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758(b)(2)(B)) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking ``(B) Applications'' and inserting ``(B)(i) 
        Applications''; and
            (2) by adding at the end the following new clause:
    ``(ii)(I) Applications for free and reduced price lunches that are 
distributed pursuant to clause (i) to parents or guardians of children 
in attendance at schools participating in the school lunch program 
under this Act shall also contain information on the availability of 
medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) (commonly referred to as the `medicaid program') 
and of child health assistance and health coverage under title XXI of 
such Act (commonly referred to as `CHIP'), including information on how 
to obtain an application for assistance under such program.
    ``(II) Information on the medicaid program and CHIP under subclause 
(I) shall be provided on a form separate from the application form for 
free and reduced price lunches under clause (i).''.

SEC. 105. EXPANSION OF BASIC SERVICES REQUIRED FOR BENCHMARK-EQUIVALENT 
              COVERAGE UNDER CHIP.

    (a) Addition of Vision, Hearing, and Dental Services.--
            (1) In general.--Section 2103(c)(1) of the Social Security 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(1)) is amended by adding at the end 
        the following:
                    ``(E) Vision services for children.
                    ``(F) Hearing services for children.
                    ``(G) Dental services for children.''.
            (2) Exclusion from determination of actuarial value.--
        Section 2103(c)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(4)) is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The 
        categories of basic services described in subparagraphs (E), 
        (F), and (G) of paragraph (1) shall not be taken into account 
        for purposes of determining the actuarial value of coverage 
        under this paragraph.''.
            (3) Conforming amendments.--Section 2103(c)(2) of such Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(c)(2)) is amended by striking subparagraphs 
        (C) and (D).
    (b) No Limitation on Scope or Duration For Certain Services.--
Section 2103(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397cc(a)) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
            ``(5) No limitation on scope or duration for fehbp-
        equivalent children's health insurance coverage.--With respect 
        to coverage that is equivalent to the benchmark benefit package 
        described in subsection (b)(1), or that is actuarially 
        equivalent to such package and otherwise meets the requirements 
        of paragraph (2)--
                    ``(A) services otherwise provided under such 
                coverage that are medically necessary to maintain, 
                improve, or prevent the deterioration of the physical, 
                developmental, or mental health of the child may not be 
                limited with respect to scope or duration, except to 
                the degree that such services are not medically 
                necessary; and
                    ``(B) such coverage shall include the option to 
                identify medically necessary appropriate alternatives 
                to traditional care or extra contractual services 
                determined by the health plan to be a more cost 
                effective alternative than covered items or 
                services.''.

SEC. 106. ELIMINATION OF 100 HOUR RULE AND OTHER AFDC-RELATED 
              ELIGIBILITY RESTRICTIONS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1931(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-1(b)(1)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``other 
than the requirement that the child be deprived of parental support or 
care by reason of the death, continued absence from the home, 
incapacity, or unemployment of a parent,'' after ``section 407(a),''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d(a)) is amended, in the matter before paragraph (1), in clause 
(ii), by striking ``if such child is (or would, if needy, be) a 
dependent child under part A of title IV''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to 
eligibility determinations made on or after October 1, 2000.

SEC. 107. LIMITATIONS ON CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.

    (a) Limitation on Conflicts of Interest in Marketing Activities.--
            (1) Title xxi.--Section 2105(c) of the Social Security Act 
        (42 U.S.C. 300aa-5(c)) is amended by adding at the end the 
        following new paragraph:
            ``(8) Limitation on expenditures for marketing 
        activities.--Amounts expended by a State for the use of an 
        administrative vendor in marketing health benefits coverage to 
        low-income children under this title shall not be considered, 
        for purposes of subsection (a)(2)(D), to be reasonable costs to 
        administer the plan unless the following conditions are met 
        with respect to the vendor:
                    ``(A) The vendor is independent of any entity 
                offering the coverage in the same area of the State in 
                which the vendor is conducting marketing activities.
                    ``(B) No person who is an owner, employee, 
                consultant, or has a contract with the vendor either 
                has any direct or indirect financial interest with such 
                an entity or has been excluded from participation in 
                the program under this title or title XVIII or XIX or 
                debarred by any Federal agency, or subject to a civil 
                money penalty under this Act.''.
    (b) Prohibition of Affiliation With Debarred Individuals.--
            (1) Medicaid.--Section 1903(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396b(i))is amended--
                    (A) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
                (20) and inserting ``; or''; and
                    (B) by inserting after paragraph (20) the following 
                new paragraph:
            ``(21) with respect to any amounts expended for an entity 
        that receives payments under the plan unless--
                    ``(A) no person with an ownership or control 
                interest (as defined in section 1124(a)(3)) in the 
                entity is a person that is debarred, suspended, or 
                otherwise excluded from participating in procurement or 
                non-procurement activities under the Federal 
                Acquisition Regulation; and
                    ``(B) such entity has not entered into an 
                employment, consulting, or other agreement for the 
                provision of items or services that are material to 
                such entity's obligations under the plan with a person 
                described in subparagraph (A).''.
            (2) Title xxi.--Section 2107(e)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1397gg(e)(1)), as amended by section 102(b), is further amended 
        by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
                    ``(F) Section 1903(i)(21) (relating to prohibition 
                of affiliation with debarred individuals).''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to expenditures made on or after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 108. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS TO IMPROVE MEDICAID AND CHIP OUTREACH 
              TO HOMELESS INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES.

    (a) Authority.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
award demonstration grants to not more than 7 States (or other 
qualified entities) to conduct innovative programs that are designed to 
improve outreach to homeless individuals and families under the 
programs described in subsection (b) with respect to enrollment of such 
individuals and families under such programs and the provision of 
services (and coordinating the provision of such services) under such 
programs.
    (b) Programs for Homeless Described.--The programs described in 
this subsection are as follows:
            (1) Medicaid.--The program under title XIX of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
            (2) CHIP.--The program under title XXI of such Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.).
            (3) TANF.--The program under part of A of title IV of such 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.).
            (4) SAMHSA block grants.--The program of grants under part 
        B of title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
        300x-1 et seq.).
            (5) Food stamp program.--The program under the Food Stamp 
        Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.).
            (6) Workforce investment act.--The program under the 
        Workforce Investment Act of 1999 (29 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.).
            (7) Welfare-to-work.--The welfare-to-work program under 
        section 403(a)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
        603(a)(5)).
            (8) Other programs.--Other public and private benefit 
        programs that serve low-income individuals.
    (c) Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out this section, 
there is appropriated, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, $10,000,000, to remain available until expended.

         TITLE II--ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE CARE FOR ALL AMERICANS

SEC. 201. EXTENSION OF COVERAGE TO SINGLE INDIVIDUALS.

    (a) Requirement To Extend Coverage to Single Individuals.--Section 
1902(a)(66) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(66)), as 
added by section 101(a), is amended--
            (1) by striking ``under paragraph (10)(A)(ii)((XVIII)'' and 
        inserting ``under--
                    ``(A) paragraph (10)(A)(ii)((XVIII)'';
            (2) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(B) paragraph (10)(A)(ii)(XIX) for individuals 
                described in subsection (aa)(1) in accordance with the 
                conditions described in paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), 
                and (6) of subsection (aa).''.
    (b) Coverage Under Medicaid.--
            (1) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as amended by 
        section 101(b), is amended--
                    (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
                (XVII);
                    (B) by adding ``or'' at the end of subclause 
                (XVIII); and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following new 
                subclause:
                                    ``(XIX) who are individuals 
                                described in subsection (aa)(1);''.
            (2) Conditions for coverage.--Section 1902 of such Act is 
        amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(aa)(1) The individuals described in this paragraph are 
individuals--
            ``(A) who are not otherwise eligible for medical assistance 
        under subsection (a)(10)(A); and
            ``(B) whose income is at least--
                    ``(i) with respect to fiscal year 2003, 50 percent 
                of the poverty line;
                    ``(ii) with respect to fiscal year, 2004, 100 
                percent of the poverty line;
                    ``(iii) with respect to fiscal year 2005, 150 
                percent of the poverty line;
                    ``(iv) with respect to fiscal year 2006, 200 
                percent of the poverty line;
                    ``(v) with respect to fiscal year 2007, 250 percent 
                of the poverty line; and
                    ``(vi) with respect to fiscal year 2008, 300 
                percent of the poverty line.
    ``(2) At State option, clause (iii), (iv), (v), or (vi) of 
paragraph (1)(B) shall not apply but only if the State provides health 
coverage for an individual who would be described in any such clause in 
accordance with section 2111.
    ``(3) The State provides that individuals described in paragraph 
(1) remain eligible for medical assistance for a period (of at least 12 
months) following the eligibility determination required under such 
paragraph.
    ``(4) The State has a State child health plan under title XXI which 
(whether implemented under such title or under this title) does not 
limit the acceptance of applications for individuals described in 
paragraph (1), does not use a waiting list for such individuals who 
meet eligibility standards to qualify for assistance (under this title 
or, if the State offers such individuals assistance under section 
2111(a)(2), title XXI), and provides benefits to all such individuals 
in the State who apply for and meet eligibility standards.
    ``(5) The State does not cover individuals described in paragraph 
(1) with higher family income without covering such individuals with a 
lower family income.
    ``(6) Section 1920A(e) shall apply to individuals described in 
paragraph (1) in the same manner as such section applies to parents 
described in that section.''.
            (3) Conforming amendments.--
                    (A) Eligibility categories.--Section 1905(a) of 
                such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as amended by section 
                101(b)(4)(A), is amended, in the matter before 
                paragraph (1)--
                            (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause 
                        (xi);
                            (ii) by inserting ``or'' at the end of 
                        clause (xii); and
                            (iii) by inserting after clause (xii) the 
                        following new clause:
            ``(xiii) who are individuals described in section 
        1902(aa)(1),''.
                    (B) Income limitations.--Section 1903(f)(4) of such 
                Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), as amended by section 
                101(b)(4)(B), is amended by inserting 
                ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX),'' after 
                ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII),''.
    (c) Coverage Under SCHIP.--
            (1) In general.--Section 2111 of such Act, as added by 
        section 101(c), is amended--
                    (A) in the heading, by inserting ``and single 
                adults'' before the period;
                    (B) in subsection (a)--
                            (i) by striking ``Notwithstanding'' and 
                        inserting the following:
            ``(1) Families.--Notwithstanding''; and
                            (ii) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(2) Certain single individuals.--Notwithstanding any 
        other provision of this title, with respect to a State that 
        does not provide medical assistance under section 
        1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX) for an individual described in clause 
        (iii), (iv), (v), or (vi) of section 1902(aa)(1)(B), the State 
        shall provide health coverage under this title for such an 
        individual through an amendment to its State child health plan 
        under section 2102 in accordance with this section and the 
        conditions described in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 
        1902(aa).''; and
                    (C) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the 
                following new paragraph:
            ``(3) Treatment of certain single individuals.--A State 
        child health plan shall treat, and shall apply this section to, 
        an individual described in subsection (a)(2) in the same manner 
        as such plan treats and applies this section to a family 
        described in section 1902(k)(1).''.

                    TITLE III--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. AVAILABILITY OF UNSUBSIDIZED COVERAGE.

    (a) Requirement To Offer Coverage.--
            (1) In general.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended--
                    (A) by redesignating section 1935 as section 1936; 
                and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following new section:

                       ``availability of coverage

    ``Sec. 1936. (a) In General.--Beginning with calendar year 2002, 
each State with a plan approved under this title shall make available 
to any individual or family with income that exceeds 300 percent of the 
poverty line (as defined in section 673(2) of the Community Services 
Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)), including any revision required by 
such section) medical assistance provided under this title or health 
coverage under section 2111 through payment of a premium determined in 
accordance with subsection (b).
    ``(b) Determination of Premiums.--
            ``(1) In general.--Premiums for coverage under this title 
        shall be based on the pooled average cost of medical assistance 
        provided under this title for the relevant comparison group for 
        the individual purchasing such coverage.
            ``(2) No adjustment for health status.--Premiums imposed 
        under this section may not be adjusted for the health status of 
        the individual.
            ``(3) Application of hipaa.--The provisions of title XXVII 
        of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) 
        apply to coverage made available under this section.
    ``(c) Comparability of Coverage.--Medical assistance made available 
under this section shall be provided to an individual or family 
purchasing such coverage in the same amount, duration, and scope as 
such assistance is made available for an individual or family who is 
eligible for such assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A).
    ``(d) Presumptive Eligibility.--Each individual that indicates on a 
form described in paragraph (2) of section 301(c) of Basic Access to 
Secure Health Insurance Coverage Health Plan (BASIC Health Plan) Act 
that the individual believes he or she (and the individual's family, if 
applicable) is eligible for medical assistance under this section, and 
that is forwarded to a State agency in accordance with paragraph (1)(B) 
of such section, shall be provided with a period of presumptive 
eligibility for coverage under this section (in the same manner as such 
a period is imposed under sections 1920 and 1920A) until such time as 
the State makes a determination as to such eligibility.
    ``(e) No Effect on Coverage Offered Under a Waiver.--Nothing in 
this section shall be construed as affecting any medical assistance 
made available under a waiver of the requirements of this title (under 
section 1115 or otherwise) to an individual or family described in 
subsection (a).''.
            (2) Establishment of optional eligibility category.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the 
                Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as 
                amended by section 201(b)(1)(C), is amended--
                            (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of 
                        subclause (XVIII);
                            (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end 
                        of subclause (XIX) and inserting ``, or''; and
                            (iii) by adding at the end the following 
                        new subclause:
                                    ``(XX) who are individuals 
                                described in section 1936 (subject to 
                                payment of a premium determined in 
                                accordance with that section);''.
                    (B) Conforming amendments.--
                            (i) Eligibility categories.--Section 
                        1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as 
                        amended by section 201(b)(3), is amended, in 
                        the matter before paragraph (1)--
                                    (I) by striking ``or'' at the end 
                                of clause (xii);
                                    (II) by inserting ``or'' at the end 
                                of clause (xiii); and
                                    (III) by inserting after clause 
                                (xiii) the following new clause:
            ``(xiv) who are individuals described in section 
        1902(aa)(1),''.
                            (ii) Income limitations.--Section 
                        1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), 
                        as amended by section 201(b)(3)(B), is amended 
                        by inserting ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),'' after 
                        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX),''.
    (b) Coverage Under SCHIP.--Section 2111 of such Act, as amended by 
section 201(c), is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following 
        new paragraph:
            ``(3) Other individuals and families.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
                provision of this title, with respect to a State that 
                does not provide medical assistance under section 1936 
                for an individual or family described in subsection (a) 
                of that section, the State shall make available through 
                the payment of a premium determined in accordance with 
                section 1936(b), health coverage under this title for 
                such an individual or family through an amendment to 
                its State child health plan under section 2102 in 
                accordance with this section and the requirements of 
                section 1936.
                    ``(B) Determination of premium.--For purposes of 
                determining a premium for the purchase of health 
                coverage under this title, paragraph (1) of section 
                1936(b) shall be applied by substituting `pooled 
                average cost of health coverage' for `pooled average 
                cost of medical assistance'.''; and
            (2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following 
        new paragraph:
            ``(4) Treatment of other individuals and families.--A State 
        child health plan shall treat, and shall apply this section to, 
        an individual or family described in subsection (a)(3) in the 
        same manner as such plan treats and applies this section to a 
        family described in section 1902(k)(1).''.
    (c) Employer Responsibilities.--
            (1) In general.--Beginning with calendar year 2002, each 
        covered employer shall--
                    (A) inform, through the use of the form described 
                in paragraph (2), each individual in the person's 
                employ who is not eligible for health benefits coverage 
                provided by such employer, of the opportunity to 
                purchase health benefits coverage under section 1936 or 
                2111 of the Social Security Act;
                    (B) forward all such forms on which an individual 
                indicates that the individual believes they are 
                eligible for coverage under such sections of the Social 
                Security Act to the appropriate State agency, unless 
                the individual specifically declines such coverage on 
                such form; and
                    (C) with respect to each such individual who 
                purchases such coverage (for such individual or their 
                family), withhold an amount equal to the premium 
                required by the State for the coverage from the 
                individual's wages and forward such amount to the 
                appropriate place (as determined by the State).
            (2) Form described.--The form described in this paragraph 
        is a form that--
                    (A) is developed by the State in which the covered 
                employer resides in accordance with guidelines issued 
                by the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
                    (B) describes the health benefits coverage 
                available under sections 1936 and 2111 of the Social 
                Security Act; and
                    (C) provides an individual with an opportunity to 
                indicate on the form if the individual believes that 
                they are eligible for such coverage or to decline such 
                coverage.
            (3) Annual provision.--In the case of any employee who 
        declines coverage under section 1936 or 2111 of the Social 
        Security Act on the form described in paragraph (2), a covered 
        employer shall provide such form to each such individual not 
        less than annually to allow the individual to revoke such 
        declination.
            (4) Definition of covered employer.--In this section, the 
        term `covered employer' means, for any calendar year, any 
        person on whom an excise tax is imposed under section 3111 or 
        1401 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to 
        having an individual in the person's employ to whom wages are 
        paid by such person during such calendar year.

[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 3749 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






116th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 3749

 To protect the privacy of health information during a national health 
                               emergency.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                              May 14, 2020

 Mr. Blumenthal (for himself and Mr. Warner) introduced the following 
  bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, 
                     Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
 To protect the privacy of health information during a national health 
                               emergency.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Public Health Emergency Privacy 
Act''.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

    In this Act:
            (1) Affirmative express consent.--The term ``affirmative 
        express consent'' means an affirmative act by an individual 
        that--
                    (A) clearly and conspicuously communicates the 
                individual's authorization of an act or practice;
                    (B) is made in the absence of any mechanism in the 
                user interface that has the purpose or substantial 
                effect of obscuring, subverting, or impairing decision 
                making or choice to obtain consent; and
                    (C) cannot be inferred from inaction.
            (2) Collect.--The term ``collect'', with respect to 
        emergency health data, means obtaining in any manner by a 
        covered organization.
            (3) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
        Trade Commission.
            (4) Covered organization.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``covered organization'' 
                means any person (including a government entity)--
                            (i) that collects, uses, or discloses 
                        emergency health data electronically or through 
                        communication by wire or radio; or
                            (ii) that develops or operates a website, 
                        web application, mobile application, mobile 
                        operating system feature, or smart device 
                        application for the purpose of tracking, 
                        screening, monitoring, contact tracing, or 
                        mitigation, or otherwise responding to the 
                        COVID-19 public health emergency.
                    (B) Exclusions.--The term ``covered organization'' 
                does not include--
                            (i) a health care provider;
                            (ii) a person engaged in a de minimis 
                        collection or processing of emergency health 
                        data;
                            (iii) a service provider;
                            (iv) a person acting in their individual or 
                        household capacity; or
                            (v) a public health authority.
            (5) Demographic data.--The term ``demographic data'' means 
        information relating to the actual or perceived race, color, 
        ethnicity, national origin, religion, sex, gender, gender 
        identity, sexual orientation, age, Tribal affiliation, 
        disability, domicile, employment status, familial status, 
        immigration status, or veteran status of an individual or group 
        of individuals.
            (6) Device.--The term ``device'' means any electronic 
        equipment that is primarily designed for or marketed to 
        consumers.
            (7) Disclosure.--The term ``disclosure'', with respect to 
        emergency health data, means the releasing, transferring, 
        selling, providing access to, licensing, or divulging in any 
        manner by a covered organization to a third party.
            (8) Emergency health data.--The term ``emergency health 
        data'' means data linked or reasonably linkable to an 
        individual or device, including data inferred or derived about 
        the individual or device from other collected data provided 
        such data is still linked or reasonably linkable to the 
        individual or device, that concerns the public COVID-19 health 
        emergency. Such data includes--
                    (A) information that reveals the past, present, or 
                future physical or behavioral health or condition of, 
                or provision of healthcare to, an individual, 
                including--
                            (i) data derived from the testing or 
                        examination of a body part or bodily substance, 
                        or a request for such testing;
                            (ii) whether or not an individual has 
                        contracted or been tested for, or an estimate 
                        of the likelihood that a particular individual 
                        may contract, such disease or disorder; and
                            (iii) genetic data, biological samples, and 
                        biometrics; and
                    (B) other data collected in conjunction with other 
                emergency health data or for the purpose of tracking, 
                screening, monitoring, contact tracing, or mitigation, 
                or otherwise responding to the COVID-19 public health 
                emergency, including--
                            (i) geolocation data, when such term means 
                        data capable of determining the past or present 
                        precise physical location of an individual at a 
                        specific point in time, taking account of 
                        population densities, including cell-site 
                        location information, triangulation data 
                        derived from nearby wireless or radio frequency 
                        networks, and global positioning system data;
                            (ii) proximity data, when such term means 
                        information that identifies or estimates the 
                        past or present physical proximity of one 
                        individual or device to another, including 
                        information derived from Bluetooth, audio 
                        signatures, nearby wireless networks, and near-
                        field communications;
                            (iii) demographic data;
                            (iv) contact information for identifiable 
                        individuals or a history of the individual's 
                        contacts over a period of time, such as an 
                        address book or call log; and
                            (v) any other data collected from a 
                        personal device.
            (9) Government entity.--The term ``government entity'' 
        includes a Federal agency, a State, a local government, and 
        other organizations, as such terms are defined in section 3371 
        of title 5, United States Code.
            (10) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
        provider'' has the meaning given the term ``eligible health 
        care provider'' in title VIII of division B of the CARES Act 
        (Public Law 116-136).
            (11) HIPAA regulations.--The term ``HIPAA regulations'' 
        means parts 160 and 164 of title 45, Code of Federal 
        Regulations.
            (12) Public health authority.--The term ``public health 
        authority'' means an entity that is authorized by law to 
        collect or receive information for the purpose of preventing or 
        controlling disease, injury, or disability including, but not 
        limited to, the reporting of disease, injury, vital events such 
        as birth or death, and the conduct of public health 
        surveillance, public health investigations, and public health 
        interventions, and a person, such as a designated agency or 
        associate, acting under a grant of authority from, or under a 
        contract with, such public entity, including the employees or 
        agents of such entity or its contractors or persons or entities 
        to whom it has granted authority.
            (13) COVID-19 public health emergency.--The term ``COVID-19 
        public health emergency'' means the outbreak and public health 
        response pertaining to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), 
        associated with the emergency declared by the Secretary on 
        January 31, 2020, under section 319 of the Public Health 
        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d), and any renewals thereof and any 
        subsequent declarations by the Secretary related to the 
        coronavirus.
            (14) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services.
            (15) Service provider.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``service provider'' 
                means a person that collects, uses, or discloses 
                emergency health data for the sole purpose of, and only 
                to the extent that such entity is, conducting business 
                activities on behalf of, for the benefit of, under 
                instruction of, and under contractual agreement with a 
                covered organization.
                    (B) Limitation of application.--Such person shall 
                only be considered a service provider in the course of 
                activities described in subparagraph (A).
                    (C) Exclusions.--The term ``service provider'' 
                excludes a person that develops or operates a website, 
                web application, mobile application, or smart device 
                application for the purpose of tracking, screening, 
                monitoring, contact tracing, or mitigation, or 
                otherwise responding to the COVID-19 public health 
                emergency.
            (16) State.--The term ``State'' means each State of the 
        United States, the District of Columbia, each commonwealth, 
        territory, or possession of the United States, and each 
        federally recognized Indian Tribe.
            (17) Third party.--
                    (A) In general.--The term ``third party'' means, 
                with respect to a covered organization--
                            (i) another person to whom such covered 
                        organization disclosed emergency health data; 
                        and
                            (ii) a corporate affiliate or a related 
                        party of the covered organization that does not 
                        have a direct relationship with an individual 
                        with whom the emergency health data is linked 
                        or is reasonably linkable.
                    (B) Exclusion.--The term ``third party'' excludes, 
                with respect to a covered organization--
                            (i) a service provider of such covered 
                        organization; or
                            (ii) a public health authority.
            (18) Use.--The term ``use'', with respect to emergency 
        health data, means the processing, employment, application, 
        utilization, examination, or analysis of such data by a covered 
        organization that maintains such data.

SEC. 3. PROTECTING THE PRIVACY AND SECURITY OF EMERGENCY HEALTH DATA.

    (a) Right to Privacy.--A covered organization that collects 
emergency health data shall--
            (1) only collect, use, or disclose such data that is 
        necessary, proportionate, and limited for a good faith public 
        health purpose, including a service or feature to support such 
        a purpose;
            (2) take reasonable measures, where possible, to ensure the 
        accuracy of emergency health data and provide an effective 
        mechanism for an individual to correct inaccurate information;
            (3) adopt reasonable safeguards to prevent unlawful 
        discrimination on the basis of emergency health data; and
            (4) only disclose such data to a government entity when the 
        disclosure--
                    (A) is to a public health authority; and
                    (B) is made in solely for good faith public health 
                purposes and in direct response to exigent 
                circumstances.
    (b) Right to Security.--A covered organization or service provider 
that collects, uses, or discloses emergency health data shall establish 
and implement reasonable data security policies, practices, and 
procedures to protect the security and confidentiality of emergency 
health data.
    (c) Prohibited Uses.--A covered organization shall not collect, 
use, or disclose emergency health data for any purpose not authorized 
under this section, including--
            (1) commercial advertising, recommendation for e-commerce, 
        or the training of machine-learning algorithms related to, or 
        subsequently for use in, commercial advertising and e-commerce;
            (2) soliciting, offering, selling, leasing, licensing, 
        renting, advertising, marketing, or otherwise commercially 
        contracting for employment, finance, credit, insurance, 
        housing, or education opportunities in a manner that 
        discriminates or otherwise makes opportunities unavailable on 
        the basis of emergency health data; and
            (3) segregating, discriminating in, or otherwise making 
        unavailable the goods, services, facilities, privileges, 
        advantages, or accommodations of any place of public 
        accommodation (as such term is defined in section 301 of the 
        Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12181)), 
        except as authorized by a State or Federal Government entity 
        for a public health purpose notwithstanding subsection (g).
    (d) Consent.--
            (1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for a covered 
        organization to collect, use, or disclose emergency health 
        data, unless--
                    (A) the individual to whom the data pertains has 
                given affirmative express consent to such collection, 
                use, or disclosure;
                    (B) such collection, use, or disclosure is 
                necessary and for the sole purpose of--
                            (i) protecting against malicious, 
                        deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity; or
                            (ii) detecting, responding to, or 
                        preventing information security incidents or 
                        threats; or
                    (C) the covered organization is compelled to do so 
                by a legal obligation.
            (2) Revocation.--
                    (A) In general.--A covered organization shall 
                provide an effective mechanism for an individual to 
                revoke consent after it is given.
                    (B) Effect.--After an individual revokes consent, 
                the covered organization shall cease collecting, using, 
                or disclosing the individual's emergency health data as 
                soon as practicable, but in no case later than 15 days 
                after the receipt of the individual's revocation of 
                consent.
                    (C) Destruction.--Not later than 30 days after the 
                receipt of an individual's revocation of consent, a 
                covered organization shall destroy or render not 
                linkable that individuals emergency health data under 
                the same procedures in subsection (f).
    (e) Notice.--A covered organization that collects, uses, or 
discloses emergency health data shall provide to an individual a 
privacy policy that--
            (1) is disclosed in a clear and conspicuous manner, in the 
        language in which the individual typically interacts with the 
        covered organization, prior to or at the point of the 
        collection of emergency health data;
            (2) describes how and for what purposes the covered 
        organization collects, uses, and discloses emergency health 
        data, including the categories of recipients to whom it 
        discloses data and the purpose of disclosure for each category;
            (3) describes the covered organization's data retention and 
        data security policies and practices for emergency health data; 
        and
            (4) describes how an individual may exercise the rights 
        under this Act and how to contact the Commission to file a 
        complaint.
    (f) Public Reporting.--
            (1) In general.--A covered organization that collects, 
        uses, or discloses emergency health data of at least 100,000 
        individuals shall, at least once every 90 days, issue a public 
        report--
                    (A) stating in aggregate terms the number of 
                individuals whose emergency health data the covered 
                organization collected, used, or disclosed to the 
                extent practicable; and
                    (B) describing the categories of emergency health 
                data collected, used, or disclosed, the purposes for 
                which each such category of emergency health data was 
                collected, used, or disclosed, and the categories of 
                third parties to whom it was disclosed.
            (2) Rules of construction.--Nothing in this subsection 
        shall be construed to require a covered organization to--
                    (A) take an action that would convert data that is 
                not emergency health data into emergency health data;
                    (B) collect or maintain emergency health data that 
                the covered organization would otherwise not maintain; 
                or
                    (C) maintain emergency health data longer than the 
                covered organization would otherwise maintain such 
                data.
    (g) Required Data Destruction.--
            (1) In general.--A covered organization may not use or 
        maintain emergency health data of an individual after the later 
        of--
                    (A) the date that is 60 days after the termination 
                of the public health emergency declared by the 
                Secretary on January 31, 2020, pertaining to 
                Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) under section 319 
                of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d) and 
                any renewals thereof;
                    (B) the date that is 60 days after the termination 
                of a public health emergency declared by a governor or 
                chief executive of a State pertaining to Coronavirus 
                Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in which the individual 
                resides; or
                    (C) 60 days after collection.
            (2) Requirement.--For the requirements under paragraph (1), 
        data shall be destroyed or rendered not linkable in such a 
        manner that it is impossible or demonstrably impracticable to 
        identify any individual from the data.
            (3) Relation to certain requirements.--The provisions of 
        this subsection shall not supersede any requirements or 
        authorizations under--
                    (A) the Privacy Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-79);
                    (B) the HIPPA regulations; or
                    (C) Federal or State medical records retention and 
                health privacy laws or regulations, or other applicable 
                Federal or State laws.
    (h) Emergency Data Collected, Used, or Disclosed Before 
Enactment.--
            (1) Initiating a rulemaking.--Not later than 7 days after 
        the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall 
        initiate a public rulemaking to promulgate regulations to 
        ensure a covered organization that has collected, used, or 
        disclosed emergency health data before the date of enactment of 
        this Act is in compliance with this Act, to the degree 
        practicable.
            (2) Completing a rulemaking.--The Commission shall complete 
        the rulemaking within 45 days after the date of enactment of 
        this Act.
    (i) Non-Application to Manual Contact Tracing and Case 
Investigation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or 
prohibit a public health authority from administering programs or 
activities to identify individuals who have contracted, or may have 
been exposed to, COVID-19 through interviews, outreach, case 
investigation, and other recognized investigatory measures by a public 
health authority or their designated agent by a public health authority 
or their designated agent intended to monitor and mitigate the 
transmission of a disease or disorder.
    (j) Research and Development.--This section shall not be construed 
to prohibit--
            (1) public health or scientific research associated with 
        the COVID-19 public health emergency by--
                    (A) a public health authority;
                    (B) a nonprofit organization, as described in 
                section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; 
                or
                    (C) an institution of higher education, as such 
                term is defined in section 101 of the Higher Education 
                Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001); or
            (2) research, development, manufacture, or distribution of 
        a drug, biological product, or vaccine that relates to a 
        disease or disorder that is associated or potentially 
        associated with a public health emergency.
    (k) Legal Requirements.--Notwithstanding subsection (a)(5), nothing 
in this Act shall be construed to prohibit a good faith response to, or 
compliance with, otherwise valid subpoenas, court orders, or other 
legal processes, or to prohibit storage or providing information as 
otherwise required by law.
    (l) Application to HIPAA Covered Entities.--
            (1) In general.--This Act does not apply to a ``covered 
        entity'' or a person acting as a ``business associate'' under 
        the HIPAA regulations (to the extent that such entities or 
        associates are acting in such capacity) or any health care 
        provider.
            (2) Guidance for consistency.--Not later than 30 days after 
        the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
        promulgate guidance on the applicability of requirements, 
        similar to those in this section to ``covered entities'' and 
        persons acting as ``business associates'' under the HIPAA 
        regulations. In promulgating such guidance, the Secretary shall 
        reduce duplication of requirements and may exclude a 
        requirement of this section if such requirement is already a 
        requirement of the HIPAA regulations.

SEC. 4. PROTECTING THE RIGHT TO VOTE.

    (a) In General.--A government entity may not, and a covered 
organization may not knowingly facilitate, on the basis of an 
individual's emergency health data, medical condition, or participation 
or non-participation in a program to collect emergency health data--
            (1) deny, restrict, or interfere with the right to vote in 
        a Federal, State, or local election;
            (2) attempt to deny, restrict, or interfere with the right 
        to vote in a Federal, State, or local election; or
            (3) retaliate against an individual for voting in a 
        Federal, State, or local election.
    (b) Civil Action.--In the case of any violation of subsection (a), 
an individual may bring a civil action to obtain appropriate relief 
against a government entity in a Federal district court.

SEC. 5. REPORTS ON CIVIL RIGHTS IMPACTS.

    (a) Report Required.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
United States Commission on Civil Rights and the Commission, shall 
prepare and submit to Congress reports that examines the civil rights 
impact of the collection, use, and disclosure of health information in 
response to the COVID-19 public health emergency.
    (b) Scope of Report.--Each report required under subsection (a) 
shall, at a minimum--
            (1) evaluate the impact of such practices on civil rights 
        and protections for individuals based on race, color, 
        ethnicity, national origin, religion, sex, gender, gender 
        identity, sexual orientation, age, Tribal affiliation, 
        disability, domicile, employment status, familial status, 
        immigration status, or veteran status;
            (2) analyze the impact, risks, costs, legal considerations, 
        disparate impacts, and other implications to civil rights of 
        policies to incentivize or require the adoption of digital 
        tools or apps used for contact tracing, exposure notification, 
        or health monitoring; and
            (3) include recommendations on preventing and addressing 
        undue or disparate impact, segregation, discrimination, or 
        infringements of civil rights in the collection and use of 
        health information, including during a national health 
        emergency.
    (c) Timing.--
            (1) Initial report.--The Secretary shall submit an initial 
        report under subsection (a) not sooner than 9 months, and not 
        later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
            (2) Subsequent reports.--The Secretary shall submit reports 
        annually after the initial report required under paragraph (1) 
        until 1 year after the termination of any public health 
        emergency pertaining to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
        under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
        247d).

SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.

    (a) Federal Trade Commission.--
            (1) Unfair or deceptive acts or practices.--A violation of 
        this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act shall be 
        treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or 
        deceptive act or practice under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the 
        Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)) regarding 
        unfair or deceptive acts or practices.
            (2) Powers of commission.--The Commission shall enforce 
        this Act and the regulations promulgated under this Act in the 
        same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, 
        powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and 
        provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et 
        seq.) were incorporated into and made a part of this Act. Any 
        person who violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under 
        this Act shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to the 
        privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade 
        Commission Act. Provided, however, that, notwithstanding the 
        requirements of section 16(a) of the Federal Trade Commission 
        Act (15 U.S.C. 56(a)), the Commission shall have the exclusive 
        authority to commence or defend, and supervise the litigation 
        of, any action for a violation of this Act or a regulation 
        promulgated under this Act and any appeal of such action in its 
        own name by any of its attorneys designated by it for such 
        purpose, without first referring the matter to the Attorney 
        General.
            (3) Rulemaking authority.--
                    (A) In general.--The Commission shall have 
                authority under section 553 of title 5, United States 
                Code, to promulgate any regulations necessary to 
                implement this Act.
                    (B) Consultation.--In promulgating any regulations 
                under this Act, the Commission shall consult with the 
                Secretary.
            (4) Common carriers and nonprofit organizations.--
        Notwithstanding section 4, 5(a)(2), or 6 of the Federal Trade 
        Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 44; 45(a)(2); 46) or any 
        jurisdictional limitation of the Commission, the Commission 
        shall also enforce this Act, in the same manner provided in 
        paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph, with respect to--
                    (A) common carriers subject to the Acts to regulate 
                commerce, air carriers, and foreign air carriers 
                subject to part A of subtitle VII of title 49, and 
                persons, partnerships, or corporations insofar as they 
                are subject to the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 
                U.S.C. 181 et seq.), except as provided in section 
                406(b) of such Act (7 U.S.C. 227(b)); and
                    (B) organizations not organized to carry on 
                business for their own profit or that of their members.
    (b) Enforcement by States.--
            (1) In general.--In any case in which the attorney general 
        of a State has reason to believe that an interest of the 
        residents of the State has been or is threatened or adversely 
        affected by the engagement of any person subject to this Act in 
        a practice that violates such subsection, the attorney general 
        of the State may, as parens patriae, bring a civil action on 
        behalf of the residents of the State in an appropriate district 
        court of the United States to obtain appropriate relief.
            (2) Rights of the federal trade commission.--
                    (A) Notice to federal trade commission.--
                            (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
                        clause (iii), the attorney general of a State 
                        shall notify the Commission in writing that the 
                        attorney general intends to bring a civil 
                        action under paragraph (1) before initiating 
                        the civil action against a person subject to 
                        this Act.
                            (ii) Contents.--The notification required 
                        by clause (i) with respect to a civil action 
                        shall include a copy of the complaint to be 
                        filed to initiate the civil action.
                            (iii) Exception.--If it is not feasible for 
                        the attorney general of a State to provide the 
                        notification required by clause (i) before 
                        initiating a civil action under paragraph (1), 
                        the attorney general shall notify the 
                        Commission immediately upon instituting the 
                        civil action.
                    (B) Intervention by the federal trade commission.--
                The Commission may--
                            (i) intervene in any civil action brought 
                        by the attorney general of a State under 
                        paragraph (1); and
                            (ii) upon intervening--
                                    (I) be heard on all matters arising 
                                in the civil action; and
                                    (II) file petitions for appeal of a 
                                decision in the civil action.
                    (C) Investigatory powers.--Nothing in this 
                subsection may be construed to prevent the attorney 
                general of a State from exercising the powers conferred 
                on the attorney general by the laws of the State to 
                conduct investigations, to administer oaths or 
                affirmations, or to compel the attendance of witnesses 
                or the production of documentary or other evidence.
            (3) Action by the federal trade commission.--If the 
        Commission institutes a civil action with respect to a 
        violation of this Act, the attorney general of a State may not, 
        during the pendency of such action, bring a civil action under 
        paragraph (1) of this subsection against any defendant named in 
        the complaint of the Commission for the violation with respect 
        to which the Commission instituted such action.
            (4) Venue; service of process.--
                    (A) Venue.--Any action brought under paragraph (1) 
                may be brought in--
                            (i) the district court of the United States 
                        that meets applicable requirements relating to 
                        venue under section 1391 of title 28, United 
                        States Code; or
                            (ii) another court of competent 
                        jurisdiction.
                    (B) Service of process.--In an action brought under 
                paragraph (1), process may be served in any district in 
                which the defendant--
                            (i) is an inhabitant; or
                            (ii) may be found.
                    (C) Actions by other state officials.--
                            (i) In general.--In addition to civil 
                        actions brought by attorneys general under 
                        paragraph (1), any other officer of a State who 
                        is authorized by the State to do so may bring a 
                        civil action under paragraph (1), subject to 
                        the same requirements and limitations that 
                        apply under this subsection to civil actions 
                        brought by attorneys general.
                            (ii) Savings provision.--Nothing in this 
                        subsection may be construed to prohibit an 
                        authorized official of a State from initiating 
                        or continuing any proceeding in a court of the 
                        State for a violation of any civil or criminal 
                        law of the State.
    (c) Private Right of Action.--
            (1) Enforcement by individuals.--
                    (A) In general.--Any individual alleging a 
                violation of this Act may bring a civil action in any 
                court of competent jurisdiction, State or Federal.
                    (B) Relief.--In a civil action brought under 
                paragraph (1) in which the plaintiff prevails, the 
                court may award--
                            (i) an amount not less than $100 and not 
                        greater than $1,000 per violation against any 
                        person who negligently violates a provision of 
                        this Act;
                            (ii) an amount not less than $500 and not 
                        greater than $5,000 per violation against any 
                        person who recklessly, willfully, or 
                        intentionally violates a provision of this Act;
                            (iii) reasonable attorney's fees and 
                        litigation costs; and
                            (iv) any other relief, including equitable 
                        or declaratory relief, that the court 
                        determines appropriate.
                    (C) Injury in fact.--A violation of this Act with 
                respect to the emergency health data of an individual 
                constitutes a concrete and particularized injury in 
                fact to that individual.
            (2) Invalidity of pre-dispute arbitration agreements and 
        pre-dispute joint action waivers.--
                    (A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
                provision of law, no pre-dispute arbitration agreement 
                or pre-dispute joint action waiver shall be valid or 
                enforceable with respect to a dispute arising under 
                this Act.
                    (B) Applicability.--Any determination as to whether 
                or how this subsection applies to any dispute shall be 
                made by a court, rather than an arbitrator, without 
                regard to whether such agreement purports to delegate 
                such determination to an arbitrator.
                    (C) Definitions.--In this subsection:
                            (i) The term ``pre-dispute arbitration 
                        agreement'' means any agreement to arbitrate a 
                        dispute that has not arisen at the time of 
                        making the agreement.
                            (ii) The term ``pre-dispute joint-action 
                        waiver'' means an agreement, whether or not 
                        part of a pre-dispute arbitration agreement, 
                        that would prohibit, or waive the right of, one 
                        of the parties to the agreement to participate 
                        in a joint, class, or collective action in a 
                        judicial, arbitral, administration, or other 
                        forum, concerning a dispute that has not yet 
                        arisen at the time of making the agreement.
                            (iii) The term ``dispute'' means any claim 
                        related to an alleged violation of this Act and 
                        between an individual and a covered 
                        organization.

SEC. 7. NONPREEMPTION.

    Nothing in this Act shall preempt or supersede, or be interpreted 
to preempt or supersede, any Federal or State law or regulation, or 
limit the authority of the Commission or the Secretary under any other 
provision of law.

SEC. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.

    (a) In General.--This Act shall apply beginning on the date that is 
30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
    (b) Authority To Promulgate Regulations and Take Certain Other 
Actions.--Nothing in subsection (a) affects--
            (1) the authority of any person to take an action expressly 
        required by a provision of this Act before the effective date 
        described in such subsection; or
            (2) the authority of the Commission to promulgate 
        regulations to implement this Act or begin a rulemaking to 
        promulgate such regulations.


[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2333 Introduced in Senate (IS)]







110th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                S. 2333

  To amend the Public Health Service Act to reauthorize the Community 
 Health Centers program, the National Health Service Corps, and rural 
                         health care programs.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                            November 8, 2007

  Mr. Kennedy introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
  referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
  To amend the Public Health Service Act to reauthorize the Community 
 Health Centers program, the National Health Service Corps, and rural 
                         health care programs.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Safety Net Act of 
2007''.

SEC. 2. COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS PROGRAM OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE 
              ACT.

    (a) Additional Authorizations of Appropriations for the Health 
Centers Program of Public Health Service Act.--Section 330(r) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b(r)) is amended by amending 
paragraph (1) to read as follows:
            ``(1) In general.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
        section, in addition to the amounts authorized to be 
        appropriated under subsection (d), there are authorized to be 
        appropriated--
                    ``(A) $2,213,020,000 for fiscal year 2008;
                    ``(B) $2,451,394,400 for fiscal year 2009;
                    ``(C) $2,757,818,700 for fiscal year 2010;
                    ``(D) $3,116,335,131 for fiscal year 2011; and
                    ``(E) $3,537,040,374 for fiscal year 2012.''.
    (b) Studies Relating to Community Health Centers.--
            (1) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
                    (A) the term ``community health center'' means a 
                health center receiving assistance under section 330 of 
                the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b); and
                    (B) the term ``medically underserved population'' 
                has the meaning given that term in such section 330.
            (2) School-based health study.--
                    (A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
                date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General 
                of the United States shall issue a study of the 
                economic costs and benefits of school-based health 
                centers and the impact on the health of students of 
                these centers.
                    (B) Content.--In conducting the study under 
                subparagraph (A), the Comptroller General of the United 
                States shall analyze--
                            (i) the impact that Federal funding could 
                        have on the operation of school-based health 
                        centers;
                            (ii) any cost savings to other Federal 
                        programs derived from providing health services 
                        in school-based health centers;
                            (iii) the potential impact on Federal 
                        budget and the health of students of providing 
                        Federal funds to school-based health clinics; 
                        and
                            (iv) the impact of access to health care 
                        from school-based health clinics in rural or 
                        underserved areas.
            (3) Health care quality study.--
                    (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
                date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health 
                and Human Services, acting through the Administrator of 
                the Health Resources and Services Administration, and 
                in collaboration with the Agency for Healthcare 
                Research and Quality, shall prepare and submit to the 
                Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of 
                the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
                the House of Representatives a report that describes 
                agency efforts to expand and accelerate quality 
                improvement activities in community health centers.
                    (B) Content.--The report under subparagraph (A) 
                shall include focus on--
                            (i) Federal efforts, as of the date of 
                        enactment of this Act, regarding health care 
                        quality in community health centers, including 
                        quality data collection, analysis, and 
                        reporting requirements;
                            (ii) identification of effective models for 
                        quality improvement in community health 
                        centers, which may include models that--
                                    (I) incorporate care coordination, 
                                disease management, and other services 
                                demonstrated to improve care;
                                    (II) are designed to address 
                                multiple, co-occurring diseases and 
                                conditions;
                                    (III) improve access to providers 
                                through non-traditional means, such as 
                                the use of remote monitoring equipment;
                                    (IV) target various medically 
                                underserved populations, including 
                                uninsured patient populations;
                                    (V) increase access to specialty 
                                care, including referrals and 
                                diagnostic testing; and
                                    (VI) enhance the use of electronic 
                                health records to improve quality;
                            (iii) efforts to determine how effective 
                        quality improvement models may be adapted for 
                        implementation by community health centers that 
                        vary by size, budget, staffing, services 
                        offered, populations served, and other 
                        characteristics determined appropriate by the 
                        Secretary of Health and Human Services;
                            (iv) types of technical assistance and 
                        resources provided to community health centers 
                        that may facilitate the implementation of 
                        quality improvement interventions;
                            (v) proposed or adopted methodologies for 
                        community health center evaluations of quality 
                        improvement interventions, including any 
                        development of new measures that are tailored 
                        to safety-net, community-based providers;
                            (vi) successful strategies for sustaining 
                        quality improvement interventions in the long-
                        term; and
                            (vii) partnerships with other Federal 
                        agencies and private organizations or networks 
                        as appropriate, to enhance health care quality 
                        in community health centers.
                    (C) Dissemination.--The Administrator of the Health 
                Resources and Services Administration shall establish a 
                formal mechanism or mechanisms for the ongoing 
                dissemination of agency initiatives, best practices, 
                and other information that may assist health care 
                quality improvement efforts in community health 
                centers.
            (4) GAO study on integrated health systems model for the 
        delivery of health care services to medically underserved 
        populations.--
                    (A) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United 
                States shall conduct a study on integrated health 
                system models at not more than 10 sites for the 
                delivery of health care services to medically 
                underserved populations. The study shall include an 
                examination of--
                            (i) health care delivery models sponsored 
                        by public or private non-profit entities that--
                                    (I) integrate primary, specialty, 
                                and acute care; and
                                    (II) serve medically underserved 
                                populations; and
                            (ii) such models in rural and urban areas.
                    (B) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
                of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General 
                of the United States shall submit to Congress a report 
                on the study conducted under subparagraph (A). The 
                report shall include--
                            (i) an evaluation of the models, as 
                        described in subparagraph (A), in--
                                    (I) expanding access to primary and 
                                preventive services for medically 
                                underserved populations; and
                                    (II) improving care coordination 
                                and health outcomes; and
                            (ii) an assessment of--
                                    (I) challenges encountered by such 
                                entities in providing care to medically 
                                underserved populations; and
                                    (II) advantages and disadvantages 
                                of such models compared to other models 
                                of care delivery for medically 
                                underserved populations.

SEC. 3. NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.

    (a) Funding.--To carry out the programs authorized under sections 
331 through 338G of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254d-
254p), there are authorized to be appropriated--
            (1) for fiscal year 2008, $131,500,000;
            (2) for fiscal year 2009, $143,335,000;
            (3) for fiscal year 2010, $156,235,150;
            (4) for fiscal year 2011, $170,296,310; and
            (5) for fiscal year 2012, $185,622,980.
    (b) Elimination of 6-Year Demonstration Requirement.--Section 
332(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e(a)(1)) is 
amended by striking ``Not earlier than 6 years'' and all that follows 
through ``purposes of this section.''.
    (c) Assignment to Shortage Area.--Section 333(a)(1)(D)(ii) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254f(a)(1)(D)(ii)) is amended--
            (1) in subclause (IV), by striking ``and'';
            (2) in subclause (V), by striking the period at the end and 
        inserting ``; and''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(VI) the entity demonstrates willingness to 
                support mentorship, professional development, and 
                training opportunities for Corps members.''.
    (d) Professional Development and Training.--Subsection (d) of 
section 336 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254h-1) is 
amended to read as follows:
    ``(d) Professional Development and Training.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall assist Corps members 
        in establishing and maintaining professional relationships and 
        development opportunities, including by--
                    ``(A) establishing appropriate professional 
                relationships between the Corps member involved and the 
                health professions community of the geographic area 
                with respect to which the member is assigned;
                    ``(B) establishing professional development, 
                training, and mentorship linkages between the Corps 
                member involved and the larger health professions 
                community, including through distance learning, direct 
                mentorship, and development and implementation of 
                training modules designed to meet the educational needs 
                of offsite Corps members;
                    ``(C) establishing professional networks among 
                Corps enrollees; and
                    ``(D) engaging in other professional development, 
                mentorship, and training activities for Corps members, 
                at the discretion of the Secretary.
            ``(2) Assistance in establishing professional 
        relationships.--In providing such assistance under paragraph 
        (1), the Secretary shall focus on establishing relationships 
        with hospitals, with academic medical centers and health 
        professions schools, with area health education centers under 
        section 781, with health education and training centers under 
        such section, and with border health education and training 
        centers under such section. Such assistance shall include 
        assistance in obtaining faculty appointments at health 
        professions schools.''.

SEC. 4. REAUTHORIZATION OF RURAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAMS.

    Section 330A(j) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254c(j)) is amended by striking ``$40,000,000'' and all that follows 
and inserting ``$45,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 
2012.''.

[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1895 Reported in Senate (RS)]

<DOC>





                                                       Calendar No. 133
116th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                S. 1895

                      To lower health care costs.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                             June 19, 2019

 Mr. Alexander (for himself and Mrs. Murray) introduced the following 
  bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, 
                     Education, Labor, and Pensions

                              July 8, 2019

              Reported by Mr. Alexander, with an amendment
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
                               in italic]

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
                      To lower health care costs.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

<DELETED>SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Lower 
Health Care Costs Act''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act 
is as follows:</DELETED>

<DELETED>Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
            <DELETED>TITLE I--ENDING SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS

<DELETED>Sec. 101. Protecting patients against out-of-network 
                            deductibles in emergencies.
<DELETED>Sec. 102. Protection against surprise bills.
<DELETED>Sec. 103. Benchmark for payment.
<DELETED>Sec. 104. Effective date.
<DELETED>Sec. 105. Ending surprise air ambulance bills.
<DELETED>Sec. 106. Report.
      <DELETED>TITLE II--REDUCING THE PRICES OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS

<DELETED>Sec. 201. Biological product patent transparency.
<DELETED>Sec. 202. Orange book modernization.
<DELETED>Sec. 203. Ensuring timely access to generics.
<DELETED>Sec. 204. Protecting access to biological products.
<DELETED>Sec. 205. Preventing blocking of generic drugs.
<DELETED>Sec. 206. Education on biological products.
<DELETED>Sec. 207. Biological product innovation.
<DELETED>Sec. 208. Clarifying the meaning of new chemical entity.
<DELETED>Sec. 209. Streamlining the transition of biological products.
<DELETED>Sec. 210. Orphan drug clarification.
<DELETED>Sec. 211. Prompt approval of drugs related to safety 
                            information.
<DELETED>Sec. 212. Conditions of use for biosimilar biological 
                            products.
<DELETED>Sec. 213. Modernizing the labeling of certain generic drugs.
       <DELETED>TITLE III--IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTH CARE

<DELETED>Sec. 301. Increasing transparency by removing gag clauses on 
                            price and quality information.
<DELETED>Sec. 302. Banning anticompetitive terms in facility and 
                            insurance contracts that limit access to 
                            higher quality, lower cost care.
<DELETED>Sec. 303. Designation of a nongovernmental, nonprofit 
                            transparency organization to lower 
                            Americans' health care costs.
<DELETED>Sec. 304. Protecting patients and improving the accuracy of 
                            provider directory information.
<DELETED>Sec. 305. Timely bills for patients.
<DELETED>Sec. 306. Health plan oversight of pharmacy benefit manager 
                            services.
<DELETED>Sec. 307. Government Accountability Office study on profit- 
                            and revenue-sharing in health care.
<DELETED>Sec. 308. Disclosure of direct and indirect compensation for 
                            brokers and consultants to employer-
                            sponsored health plans and enrollees in 
                            plans on the individual market.
<DELETED>Sec. 309. Ensuring enrollee access to cost-sharing 
                            information.
<DELETED>Sec. 310. Strengthening parity in mental health and substance 
                            use disorder benefits.
<DELETED>Sec. 311. Technical amendments.
<DELETED>Sec. 312. Third-party administrators.
               <DELETED>TITLE IV--IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH

<DELETED>Sec. 401. Improving awareness of disease prevention.
<DELETED>Sec. 402. Grants to address vaccine-preventable diseases.
<DELETED>Sec. 403. Guide on evidence-based strategies for public health 
                            department obesity prevention programs.
<DELETED>Sec. 404. Expanding capacity for health outcomes.
<DELETED>Sec. 405. Public health data system modernization.
<DELETED>Sec. 406. Innovation for maternal health.
<DELETED>Sec. 407. Training for health care providers.
<DELETED>Sec. 408. Study on training to reduce and prevent 
                            discrimination.
<DELETED>Sec. 409. Perinatal quality collaboratives.
<DELETED>Sec. 410. Integrated services for pregnant and postpartum 
                            women.
<DELETED>Sec. 411. Extension for community health centers, the National 
                            Health Service Corps, and teaching health 
                            centers that operate GME programs.
<DELETED>Sec. 412. Other programs.
     <DELETED>TITLE V--IMPROVING THE EXCHANGE OF HEALTH INFORMATION

<DELETED>Sec. 501. Requirement to provide health claims, network, and 
                            cost information.
<DELETED>Sec. 502. Recognition of security practices.
<DELETED>Sec. 503. GAO study on the privacy and security risks of 
                            electronic transmission of individually 
                            identifiable health information to and from 
                            entities not covered by the Health 
                            Insurance Portability and Accountability 
                            Act.
<DELETED>Sec. 504. Technical corrections.

       <DELETED>TITLE I--ENDING SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 101. PROTECTING PATIENTS AGAINST OUT-OF-NETWORK 
              DEDUCTIBLES IN EMERGENCIES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 2719A(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-19a) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in paragraph (1)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
                (A), by inserting ``or a freestanding emergency room'' 
                after ``hospital''; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) in subparagraph (C)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) in clause (ii)(I), by 
                        inserting ``or emergency room'' after 
                        ``emergency department''; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) in subparagraph (C)(ii)(II), 
                        by adding, ``a deductible,'' after ``(expressed 
                        as''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in paragraph (2)(B)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) in clause (i)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) by inserting ``or freestanding 
                        emergency room'' after ``hospital''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) by inserting ``or emergency 
                        room'' after ``emergency department''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or 
                emergency room'' after ``hospital''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 102. PROTECTION AGAINST SURPRISE BILLS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) PHSA.--Section 2719A of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Coverage of Certain Out-of-Network Services.--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Subject to subsection (h), in 
        the case of an enrollee in a group health plan or group or 
        individual health insurance coverage who receives out-of-
        network, ancillary, non-emergency services at an in-network 
        facility, including any referrals for diagnostic services--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the cost-sharing requirement 
                (expressed as a copayment amount, coinsurance rate, or 
                deductible) with respect to such services shall be the 
                same requirement that would apply if such services were 
                provided by an in-network practitioner, and any 
                coinsurance or deductible shall be based on in-network 
                rates; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) such cost-sharing amounts shall be 
                counted towards the in-network deductible and in-
                network out-of-pocket maximum amount under the plan or 
                coverage for the plan year.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Definition.--For purposes of this 
        subsection, the term `facility' has the meaning given the term 
        `health care facility' in section 2729A(c).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Coverage of Out-of-Network Services for Enrollees 
Admitted After Emergency Services.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Notice and consent.--Subject to subsection 
        (h), in the case of an enrollee in a group health plan or group 
        or individual health insurance coverage who receives emergency 
        services, or maternal care for a woman in labor, in the 
        emergency department of an out-of-network facility and has been 
        stabilized (within the meaning of subsection (b)(2)(C)), if the 
        patient is subsequently admitted to the out-of-network facility 
        for care, the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a 
        copayment amount, coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect 
        to any out-of-network services is the same requirement that 
        would apply if such services were provided by a participating 
        provider, unless the enrollee, once stable and in a condition 
        to receive such information, including having sufficient mental 
        capacity--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) has been provided by the facility, 
                prior to the provision of any post-stabilization, out-
                of-network service at such facility, with--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) paper and electronic 
                        notification that the practitioner or facility 
                        is an out-of-network health care provider and 
                        the out-of-network rate of the provider, as 
                        applicable, and the option to affirmatively 
                        consent to receiving services from such 
                        practitioner or facility; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) the estimated amount that 
                        such provider may charge the participant, 
                        beneficiary, or enrollee for such items and 
                        services involved;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) has been provided by the plan or 
                coverage, prior to the provision of any post-
                stabilization, out-of-network service at such facility, 
                with--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) paper and electronic 
                        notification that the practitioner or facility 
                        is an out-of-network health care provider and 
                        the out-of-network rate of the provider, as 
                        applicable, and the option to affirmatively 
                        consent to receiving services from such 
                        practitioner or facility;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) a list of in-network 
                        practitioners or facilities that could provide 
                        the same services, and an option for a referral 
                        to such providers; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) information about whether 
                        prior authorization or other care management 
                        limitations may be required in advance of 
                        receiving in-network care at the facility; 
                        and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) has acknowledged that the out-of-
                network treatment may not be covered or may be covered 
                at an out-of-network cost-sharing amount, requiring 
                higher cost-sharing obligations of the enrollee than if 
                the service were provided at an in-network facility, 
                and has assumed, in writing, full responsibility of 
                out-of-pocket costs associated with services furnished 
                after the enrollee has been stabilized, from the out-
                of-network practitioner or facility, as 
                applicable.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Requirements of notice.--The notice under 
        paragraph (1) shall be in a format determined by the Secretary 
        to give a reasonable layperson clear comprehension of the terms 
        of the agreement, including all possible financial 
        responsibilities, including the requirements that the notice--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) does not exceed one page in 
                length;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) is readily identifiable for its 
                purpose and as a contract of consent;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) clearly states that consent is 
                optional;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) includes an estimate of the amount 
                that such provider will charge the participant, 
                beneficiary, or enrollee for such items and services 
                involved; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(E) be available in the 15 most common 
                languages in the facility's geographic area, with the 
                facility making a good faith effort to provide oral 
                notice in the enrollee's primary language if it is not 
                one of such 15 languages.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Prohibition on Billing More Than an In-Network Rate 
Under Certain Circumstances.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--A facility or practitioner 
        furnishing--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) emergency services, as defined in 
                subsection (b)(2), regardless of the State in which the 
                patient resides;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) services at an in-network facility 
                described in subsection (e); or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) out-of-network services furnished 
                after the enrollee has been stabilized (within the 
                meaning of subsection (b)(2)(C)), where the notice and 
                option for referral required under subsection (f)(1) 
                have not been provided to the enrollee and the 
                assumption of responsibility for out-of-pocket costs 
                under subsection (f)(2) has not been 
                obtained,</DELETED>
        <DELETED>may not bill an enrollee in a group health plan or 
        group or individual health insurance coverage for amounts 
        beyond the cost-sharing amount that would apply under 
        subsection (b)(1)(C)(ii)(II), (e), or (f), as 
        applicable.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Notice.--A facility furnishing services 
        described in paragraph (1) shall provide enrollees in a group 
        health plan or group or individual health insurance coverage 
        with a one-page notice, in 16-point font, upon intake at the 
        emergency room or being admitted at the facility of the 
        prohibition on balance billing under paragraph (1) and who to 
        contact for recourse if they are sent a balance bill in 
        violation of such paragraph. The facility shall be responsible 
        for obtaining the signature from the enrollee on such notice. 
        The Secretary shall issue regulations within 6 months of the 
        date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act on the 
        requirements for the notice under this paragraph.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Enforcement.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
                (B), a facility or practitioner that violates a 
                requirement under paragraph (1) shall be subject to a 
                civil monetary penalty of not more than $10,000 for 
                each act constituting such violation.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Procedure.--The provisions of 
                section 1128A of the Social Security Act, other than 
                subsections (a) and (b) and the first sentence of 
                subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall apply to civil 
                money penalties under this subsection in the same 
                manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
                proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
                Act.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Safe harbor.--The Secretary shall 
                waive the penalties described under subparagraph (A) 
                with respect to a facility or, practitioner who 
                unknowingly violates paragraph (1) with respect to an 
                enrollee, if such facility or practitioner, within 30 
                days of the violation, withdraws the bill that was in 
                violation of paragraph (1), and, as applicable, 
                reimburses the group health plan, health insurance 
                issuer, or enrollee, as applicable, in an amount equal 
                to the amount billed in violation of paragraph (1), 
                plus interest, at an interest rate determined by the 
                Secretary.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(h) Maintaining State Surprise Billing Protections.--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 514 of 
        the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, except 
        with respect to self-insured group health plans, nothing in 
        this section shall prevent a State from establishing or 
        continuing in effect an alternate method under State law for 
        determining the appropriate compensation for services described 
        in subsection (b), (e), or (f).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Additional application.--In the case of 
        group health plans or health insurance coverage in the 
        individual or group market offered in a State that has not 
        enacted an alternate method described in paragraph (1), such as 
        arbitration or a benchmark, or for services described in 
        subsection (b), (e), or (f) that are not covered by such 
        State's alternate method described in paragraph (1), the 
        provisions of this section shall apply.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Self-insured plans.--Subsections (b), (e), 
        and (f) shall apply to a self-insured group health plan that is 
        not subject to State insurance regulation.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Coverage Under Federal Employees Health Benefits 
Program.--Section 8904 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Any health benefits plan offered under this chapter 
shall be treated as a group health plan or group or individual health 
insurance coverage for purposes of subsections (e) through (g) of 
section 2719A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a) 
(except for paragraph (3) of such subsection (g)).''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 103. BENCHMARK FOR PAYMENT.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729A. BENCHMARK FOR PAYMENT.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Establishment of Benchmark.--A group health plan or 
health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
coverage shall pay facilities or practitioners furnishing services for 
which such facilities and practitioners are prohibited from billing 
enrollees under section 2719A(g), the median in-network rate, using a 
methodology determined under subsection (b) for the same or similar 
services offered by the group health plan or health insurance issuer in 
that geographic region.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Median In-Network Rate.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, 
        the term `median in-network rate' means, with respect to health 
        care services covered by a group health plan or group or 
        individual health insurance coverage, the median negotiated 
        rate under the applicable plan or coverage recognized under the 
        plan or coverage as the total maximum payment for the service 
        minus the in-network cost-sharing for such service under the 
        plan or coverage, for the same or a similar service that is 
        provided by a provider in the same or similar specialty and in 
        the geographic region in which the service is 
        furnished.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the 
        date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the 
        Secretary shall, through rulemaking, determine the methodology 
        a group health plan or health insurance issuer is required to 
        use to determine the median in-network rate described in 
        paragraph (1), differentiating by business line, the 
        information the plan or issuer shall share with the 
        nonparticipating provider involved when making such a 
        determination, and the geographic regions applied for purposes 
        of this subparagraph. Such rulemaking shall take into account 
        payments that are made by health insurance issuers that are not 
        on a fee-for-service basis.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Certain insurers.--If a group health plan or 
        health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
        insurance coverage does not have sufficient information to 
        calculate a median in-network rate for this service or provider 
        type, or amount of, claims for services (as determined by the 
        applicable State authority, in the case of health insurance 
        coverage, or by the Secretary of Labor, in the case of a self-
        insured group health plan) covered under the list of out-of-
        network services set by the State authority or Secretary of 
        Labor, as applicable, in a particular geographic area, such 
        plan or issuer shall demonstrate that it will use a database 
        free of conflicts of interest that has sufficient information 
        reflecting allowed amounts paid to individual health care 
        providers for relevant services provided in the applicable 
        geographic region, and that such plan or issuer will use that 
        database to determine a median in-network rate. The group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the cost of 
        accessing the database.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
        subsection shall prevent a group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer from establishing separate calculations of a 
        median in-network rate under paragraph (1) for services 
        delivered in nonhospital facilities, including freestanding 
        emergency rooms.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Facility.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`health care facility' includes hospitals, hospital outpatient 
departments, critical access hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, 
laboratories, radiology clinics, and any other facility that provides 
services that are covered under a group health plan or health insurance 
coverage, including settings of care subject to section 
2719A(b).''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Non-Federal Governmental Plans.--Section 2722(a)(2)(E) 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-21(a)(2)(E)) is 
amended by inserting ``, except that such election shall be available 
with respect to section 2729A'' before the period.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 104. EFFECTIVE DATE.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    The amendments made by sections 101, 102, and 103 shall 
take effect beginning in the second plan year that begins after the 
date of enactment of this Act.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 105. ENDING SURPRISE AIR AMBULANCE BILLS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 2719A (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-19a) the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2719B. ENDING SURPRISE AIR AMBULANCE BILLS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--In the case of an enrollee in a group 
health plan or group or individual health insurance coverage who 
receives air ambulance services from an out-of-network provider--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a 
        copayment amount, coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect 
        to such services shall be the same requirement that would apply 
        if such services were provided by an in-network practitioner, 
        and any coinsurance or deductible shall be based on in-network 
        rates; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) such cost-sharing amounts shall be counted 
        towards the in-network deductible and in-network out-of-pocket 
        maximum amount under the plan or coverage for the plan 
        year.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Payment Rate.--A group health plan or health 
insurance issuer shall pay for air ambulance services for purposes of 
subsection (a) at the median in-network as defined in subsection 
(c).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Median In-Network Rate.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, 
        the term `median in-network rate' means, with respect to air 
        ambulance services covered by a group health plan or group or 
        individual health insurance coverage, the median negotiated 
        rate under the applicable plan or coverage recognized under the 
        plan or coverage as the total maximum payment for the service, 
        minus the in-network cost-sharing for such service under the 
        plan or coverage, for the same or a similar service that is 
        provided by a provider in the same or similar specialty, and in 
        the geographic region in which the service is 
        furnished.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Rulemaking.--Not later than 6 months after 
        the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the 
        Secretary shall, through rulemaking, determine the methodology 
        a group health plan or health insurance issuer is required to 
        use to determine the median in-network rate described in 
        paragraph (1), the information the plan or issuer shall share 
        with the non-participating provider involved when making such a 
        determination, and the geographic regions applied for purposes 
        of this subsection. Such rulemaking shall take into account 
        payments that are made by issuers that are not on a fee-for-
        service basis.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Certain insurers.--If a group health plan or 
        health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
        insurance coverage does not have sufficient information to 
        calculate a median in-network rate for this service or provider 
        type, or amount of, claims for services (as determined by the 
        applicable State authority, in the case of health insurance 
        coverage, or by the Secretary of Labor, in the case of a self-
        insured group health plan) covered under the list of out-of-
        network services set by the State authority or Secretary of 
        Labor, as applicable, in a particular geographic area, such 
        plan or issuer shall demonstrate that it will use a database 
        free of conflicts of interest that has sufficient information 
        reflecting allowed amounts paid to individual health care 
        providers for relevant services provided in the applicable 
        geographic region, and that such plan or issuer will use that 
        database to determine a median in-network rate. The group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the cost of 
        accessing the database.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Clarification.--For purposes of this 
        subsection, the Secretary may define geographic regions that 
        are different from the geographic regions identified for 
        purposes of section 2729A(b) to ensure that an adequate number 
        of air ambulance services are in-network in each geographic 
        region so that a median in-network rate for air ambulance 
        services may be calculated for each such region.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Cost-Sharing Limitation.--An air ambulance service 
provider may not bill an enrollee in a group health plan or group or 
individual health insurance coverage for amounts beyond the cost-
sharing amount that applies under subsection (a).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Enforcement.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an 
        air ambulance service provider that violates subsection (d) 
        shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than 
        $10,000 for each act constituting such violation.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A 
        of the Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) 
        and the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, 
        shall apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in 
        the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
        proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
        Act.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Safe harbor.--The Secretary shall waive the 
        penalties described under paragraph (1) with respect to an air 
        ambulance service provider who unknowingly violates subsection 
        (d) with respect to an enrollee, if such air ambulance service 
        provider within 30 days of the violation, withdraws the bill 
        that was in violation of subsection (d), and, as applicable, 
        reimburses the group health plan, health insurance issuer, or 
        enrollee, as applicable, in an amount equal to the amount 
        billed in violation of subsection (d), plus interest, at an 
        interest rate determined by the Secretary.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2719B of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect on the date 
that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 106. REPORT.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Not later than 1 year after the effective date described 
in section 104, and annually for the following 4 years, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Federal Trade 
Commission and the Attorney General, shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) conduct a study on--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) the effects of the amendments made by 
                sections 101, 102, and 103, including any patterns of 
                vertical or horizontal integration of health care 
                facilities, providers, group health plans, or health 
                insurance issuers;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) the effects of the amendments made by 
                sections 101, 102, and 103 on overall health care 
                costs; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) recommendations for effective 
                enforcement of 2729A as added by section 103, including 
                potential challenges to addressing anti-competitive 
                consolidation by health care facilities, providers, 
                group health plans, or health insurance issuers; 
                and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) submit a report on such study to the Committee 
        on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, the Committee on 
        Commerce, Science, and Transportation, the Committee on 
        Finance, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and 
        the Committee on Education and Labor, the Committee on Energy 
        and Commerce, the Committee on Ways and Means, and the 
        Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
        Representatives.</DELETED>

 <DELETED>TITLE II--REDUCING THE PRICES OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 201. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCT PATENT TRANSPARENCY.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Section 351 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 262) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(o) Additional Requirements With Respect to Patents.--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Approved application holder listing 
        requirements.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--Beginning on the date 
                of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, within 
                60 days of approval of an application under subsection 
                (a) or (k), the holder of such approved application 
                shall submit to the Secretary a list of each patent 
                required to be disclosed (as described in paragraph 
                (3)).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Previously approved or licensed 
                biological products.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) Products licensed under 
                        section 351 of the phsa.--Not later than 30 
                        days after the date of enactment of the Lower 
                        Health Care Costs Act, the holder of a 
                        biological product license that was approved 
                        under subsection (a) or (k) before the date of 
                        enactment of such Act shall submit to the 
                        Secretary a list of each patent required to be 
                        disclosed (as described in paragraph 
                        (3)).</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Products approved under 
                        section 505 of the ffdca.--Not later than 30 
                        days after March 23, 2020, the holder of an 
                        approved application for a biological product 
                        under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
                        and Cosmetic Act that is deemed to be a license 
                        for the biological product under this section 
                        on March 23, 2020, shall submit to the 
                        Secretary a list of each patent required to be 
                        disclosed (as described in paragraph 
                        (3)).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Updates.--The holder of a biological 
                product license that is the subject of an application 
                under subsection (a) or (k) shall submit to the 
                Secretary a list that includes--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) any patent not previously 
                        required to be disclosed (as described in 
                        paragraph (3)) under subparagraph (A) or (B), 
                        as applicable, within 30 days of the earlier 
                        of--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) the date of issuance 
                                of such patent by the United States 
                                Patent and Trademark Office; 
                                or</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the date of 
                                approval of a supplemental application 
                                for the biological product; 
                                and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) any patent, or any claim 
                        with respect to a patent, included on the list 
                        pursuant to this paragraph, that the Patent 
                        Trial and Appeal Board of the United States 
                        Patent and Trademark Office determines in a 
                        decision to be invalid or unenforceable, within 
                        30 days of such decision.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Publication of information.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--Within 1 year of the 
                date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, 
                the Secretary shall publish and make available to the 
                public a single, easily searchable, list that 
                includes--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) the official and proprietary 
                        name of each biological product licensed under 
                        subsection (a) or (k), and of each biological 
                        product application approved under section 505 
                        of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and 
                        deemed to be a license for the biological 
                        product under this section on March 23, 
                        2020;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) with respect to each 
                        biological product described in clause (i), 
                        each patent submitted in accordance with 
                        paragraph (1);</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) the date of approval and 
                        application number for each such biological 
                        product;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) the marketing status, 
                        dosage form, route of administration, strength, 
                        and, if applicable, reference product, for each 
                        such biological product;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) the licensure status for 
                        each such biological product, including whether 
                        the license at the time of listing is approved, 
                        withdrawn, or revoked;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vi) with respect to each such 
                        biological product, any period of any 
                        exclusivity under paragraph (6), (7)(A), or 
                        (7)(B) of subsection (k) of this section or 
                        section 527 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
                        Cosmetic Act, and any extension of such period 
                        in accordance with subsection (m) of this 
                        section, for which the Secretary has determined 
                        such biological product to be eligible, and the 
                        date on which such exclusivity 
                        expires;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vii) information regarding any 
                        determination of biosimilarity or 
                        interchangeability for each such biological 
                        product; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(viii) information regarding 
                        approved indications for each such biological 
                        product, in such manner as the Secretary 
                        determines appropriate.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Updates.--Every 30 days after the 
                publication of the first list under subparagraph (A), 
                the Secretary shall revise the list to include--
                </DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i)(I) each biological product 
                        licensed under subsection (a) or (k) during the 
                        30-day period; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(II) with respect to each 
                        biological product described in subclause (I), 
                        the information described in clauses (i) 
                        through (viii) of subparagraph (A); 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) any updates to information 
                        previously published in accordance with 
                        subparagraph (A).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Noncompliance.--Beginning 18 months 
                after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care 
                Costs Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the 
                Director of the United States Patent and Trademark 
                Office, shall publish and make available to the public 
                a list of any holders of biological product licenses, 
                and the corresponding biological product or products, 
                that failed to submit information as required under 
                paragraph (1), including any updates required under 
                paragraph (1)(C), in such manner and format as the 
                Secretary determines appropriate. If information 
                required under paragraph (1) is submitted following 
                publication of such list, the Secretary shall remove 
                such holders of such biological product licenses from 
                the public list in a reasonable period of 
                time.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Patents required to be disclosed.--In this 
        section, a `patent required to be disclosed' is any patent for 
        which the holder of a biological product license approved under 
        subsection (a) or (k), or a biological product application 
        approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
        Cosmetic Act and deemed to be a license for a biological 
        product under this section on March 23, 2020, believes a claim 
        of patent infringement could reasonably be asserted by the 
        holder, or by a patent owner that has granted an exclusive 
        license to the holder with respect to the biological product 
        that is the subject of such license, if a person not licensed 
        by the holder engaged in the making, using, offering to sell, 
        selling, or importing into the United States of the biological 
        product that is the subject of such license.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Disclosure of Patents.--Section 351(l)(3)(A)(i) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(l)(3)(A)(i)) is amended by 
inserting ``included in the list provided by the reference product 
sponsor under subsection (o)(1)'' after ``a list of 
patents''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Review and Report on Noncompliance.--Not later than 30 
months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) solicit public comments regarding appropriate 
        remedies, in addition to the publication of the list under 
        subsection (o)(2)(C) of section 351 of the Public Health 
        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as added by subsection (a), with 
        respect to holders of biological product licenses who fail to 
        timely submit information as required under subsection (o)(1) 
        of such section 351, including any updates required under 
        subparagraph (C) of such subsection (o)(1); and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) submit to Congress an evaluation of comments 
        received under paragraph (1) and the recommendations of the 
        Secretary concerning appropriate remedies.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (d) Regulations.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services may promulgate regulations to carry out subsection (o) of 
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as added 
by subsection (a).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act, including 
an amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to require or allow 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services to delay the licensing of a 
biological product under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262).</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 202. ORANGE BOOK MODERNIZATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Submission of Patent Information for Brand Name 
Drugs.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 505(b) 
        of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)) 
        is amended to read as follows:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b)(1)(A) Any person may file with the Secretary an 
application with respect to any drug subject to the provisions of 
subsection (a). Such persons shall submit to the Secretary as part of 
the application--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(i) full reports of investigations which have 
        been made to show whether or not such drug is safe for use and 
        whether such drug is effective in use;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(ii) a full list of the articles used as 
        components of such drug;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(iii) a full statement of the composition of 
        such drug;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(iv) a full description of the methods used in, 
        and the facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, 
        processing, and packing of such drug;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(v) such samples of such drug and of the 
        articles used as components thereof as the Secretary may 
        require;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(vi) specimens of the labeling proposed to be 
        used for such drug;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(vii) any assessments required under section 
        505B; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(viii) the patent number and expiration date, of 
        each patent for which a claim of patent infringement could 
        reasonably be asserted if a person not licensed by the owner 
        engaged in the manufacture, use, or sale of the drug, and 
        that--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(I) claims the drug for which the 
                applicant submitted the application and is a drug 
                substance patent or a drug product patent; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(II) claims the method of using the drug 
                for which approval is sought or has been granted in the 
                application.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(B) If an application is filed under this subsection for 
a drug, and a patent of the type described in subparagraph (A)(viii) 
that claims such drug or a method of using such drug is issued after 
the filing date but before approval of the application, the applicant 
shall amend the application to include such patent 
information.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(C) Upon approval of the application, the Secretary 
shall publish the information submitted under subparagraph 
(A)(viii).''.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) Guidance.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
        Services shall, in consultation with the Director of the 
        National Institutes of Health and with representatives of the 
        drug manufacturing industry, review and develop guidance, as 
        appropriate, on the inclusion of women and minorities in 
        clinical trials required under subsection (b)(1)(A)(i) of 
        section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
        U.S.C. 355), as amended by paragraph (1).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Conforming Changes to Requirements for Subsequent 
Submission of Patent Information.--Section 505(c)(2) of the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(7)) is amended--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) by inserting before the first sentence the 
        following: ``Not later than 30 days after the date of approval 
        of an application under subsection (b), the holder of the 
        approved application shall file with the Secretary the patent 
        number and the expiration date of any patent described in 
        subclause (I) or (II) of subsection (b)(1)(A)(viii), except 
        that a patent that claims a method of using such drug shall be 
        filed only if approval for such use has been granted in the 
        application. The holder of the approved application shall file 
        with the Secretary the patent number and the expiration date of 
        any patent described in subclause (I) or (II) of subsection 
        (b)(1)(A)(viii) that is issued after the date of approval of 
        the application, not later than 30 days of the date of issuance 
        of the patent, except that a patent that claims a method of 
        using such drug shall be filed only if approval for such use 
        has been granted in the application.'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) by inserting after ``the patent number and the 
        expiration date of any patent which'' the following: ``fulfills 
        the criteria in subsection (b) and'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) by inserting after the third sentence (as 
        amended by paragraph (1)) the following: ``Patent information 
        that is not the type of patent information required by 
        subsection (b)(1)(A)(viii) shall not be submitted under this 
        paragraph.''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (4) by inserting after ``could not file patent 
        information under subsection (b) because no patent'' the 
        following: ``of the type required to be submitted in subsection 
        (b)''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Listing of Exclusivities.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
505(j)(7) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
355(j)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(iv) For each drug included on the list, the Secretary 
shall specify any exclusivity period that is applicable, for which the 
Secretary has determined the expiration date, and for which such period 
has not yet expired under--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(I) clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of subsection 
        (c)(3)(E) of this section;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(II) clause (iv) or (v) of paragraph (5)(B) of 
        this subsection;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(III) clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of paragraph 
        (5)(F) of this subsection;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(IV) section 505A;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(V) section 505E;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(VI) section 527(a); or</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(VII) section 505(u)''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (d) Orange Book Updates With Respect to Invalidated 
Patents.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) In general.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) Amendments.--Section 505(j)(7)(A) of 
                the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
                355(j)(7)(A)), as amended by subsection (c), is further 
                amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(v) In the case of a listed drug for which the 
        list under clause (i) includes a patent or patent claim for the 
        drug, or a patent or a patent claim for the use of such drug, 
        and where the Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual 
        Property and Director of the United States Patent and Trademark 
        Office has canceled any claim of the patent relating to such 
        drug or such use pursuant to a decision by the Patent Trial and 
        Appeal Board in an inter partes review conducted under chapter 
        31 of title 35, United States Code, or a post-grant review 
        conducted under chapter 32 of that title, and from which no 
        appeal has been taken, or can be taken, the holder of the 
        applicable approved application shall notify the Secretary, in 
        writing, within 14 days of such cancellation, and, if the 
        patent has been deemed wholly inoperative or invalid, or if a 
        patent claim has been canceled, the revisions required under 
        clause (iii) shall include striking the patent or information 
        regarding such patent claim from the list with respect to such 
        drug.''.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) Application.--The amendment made by 
                subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to any 
                determination with respect to a patent or patent claim 
                that is made prior to the date of enactment of this 
                Act.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) No effect on first applicant exclusivity 
        period.--Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I) is amended by adding at 
        the end the following: ``This subclause shall apply even if a 
        patent is stricken from the list under paragraph (7)(A), 
        pursuant to paragraph (7)(A)(v), provided that, at the time 
        that the first applicant submitted an application under this 
        subsection containing a certification described in paragraph 
        (2)(A)(vii)(IV), the patent that was the subject of such 
        certification was included in such list with respect to the 
        listed drug.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 203. ENSURING TIMELY ACCESS TO GENERICS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 505(q) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 355(q)(1)) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in paragraph (1)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by inserting 
                ``, 10.31,'' after ``10.30'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) in subparagraph (E)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) by striking ``application 
                        and'' and inserting ``application 
                        or'';</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) by striking ``If the 
                        Secretary'' and inserting the 
                        following:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) In general.--If the 
                        Secretary''; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (iii) by striking the second 
                        sentence and inserting the following:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Primary purpose of 
                        delaying.--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) In general.--For 
                                purposes of this subparagraph, a 
                                petition or supplement to a petition 
                                may be considered to be submitted with 
                                the primary purpose of delaying an 
                                application under subsection (b)(2) or 
                                (j) of this section or section 351(k) 
                                of the Public Health Service Act, if 
                                the petitioner has the purpose of 
                                setting aside, delaying, rescinding, 
                                withdrawing, or preventing submission, 
                                review, or the approval of such an 
                                application.</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) Factors.--In 
                                determining whether a petition was 
                                submitted with the primary purpose of 
                                delaying an application, the Secretary 
                                may consider the following 
                                factors:</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(aa) Whether the 
                                        petition was submitted in 
                                        accordance with paragraph 
                                        (2)(B), based on when the 
                                        petitioner knew or reasonably 
                                        should have known the relevant 
                                        information relied upon to form 
                                        the basis of such 
                                        petition.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(bb) Whether the 
                                        petitioner has submitted 
                                        multiple or serial petitions 
                                        raising issues that reasonably 
                                        could have been known to the 
                                        petitioner at the time of 
                                        submission of the earlier 
                                        petition or 
                                        petitions.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(cc) Whether the 
                                        petition was submitted close in 
                                        time to a known, first date 
                                        upon which an application under 
                                        subsection (b)(2) or (j) of 
                                        this section or section 351(k) 
                                        of the Public Health Service 
                                        Act could be 
                                        approved.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(dd) Whether the 
                                        petition was submitted without 
                                        any relevant data or 
                                        information in support of the 
                                        scientific positions forming 
                                        the basis of such 
                                        petition.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(ee) Whether the 
                                        petition raises the same or 
                                        substantially similar issues as 
                                        a prior petition to which the 
                                        Secretary has responded 
                                        substantively already, 
                                        including if the subsequent 
                                        submission follows such 
                                        response from the Secretary 
                                        closely in time.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(ff) Whether the 
                                        petition requests changing the 
                                        applicable standards that other 
                                        applicants are required to 
                                        meet, including requesting 
                                        testing, data, or labeling 
                                        standards that are more onerous 
                                        or rigorous than the standards 
                                        applicable to the listed drug, 
                                        reference product, or 
                                        petitioner's version of the 
                                        same drug.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(gg) The 
                                        petitioner's record of 
                                        submitting petitions to the 
                                        Food and Drug Administration 
                                        that have been determined by 
                                        the Secretary to have been 
                                        submitted with the primary 
                                        purpose of delay.</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(hh) Other 
                                        relevant and appropriate 
                                        factors, which the Secretary 
                                        shall describe in 
                                        guidance.</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) Guidance.--The 
                                Secretary may issue or update guidance, 
                                as appropriate, to describe factors the 
                                Secretary considers in accordance with 
                                subclause (II).'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) by adding at the end the 
                following:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) Referral to the federal 
                        trade commission.--The Secretary shall 
                        establish procedures for referring to the 
                        Federal Trade Commission any petition or 
                        supplement to a petition that the Secretary 
                        determines was submitted with the primary 
                        purpose of delaying approval of an application. 
                        Such procedures shall include notification to 
                        the petitioner and an opportunity for judicial 
                        review after the issuance of an order by the 
                        Federal Trade Commission.'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (D) by striking subparagraph 
                (F);</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (E) by redesignating subparagraphs (G) 
                through (I) as subparagraphs (F) through (H), 
                respectively; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (F) in subparagraph (H), as so 
                redesignated, by striking ``submission of this 
                petition'' and inserting ``submission of this 
                document'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in paragraph (2)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) 
                through (C) as subparagraphs (C) through (E), 
                respectively;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) by inserting before subparagraph (C), 
                as so redesignated, the following:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--A person shall submit a 
                petition to the Secretary under paragraph (1) before 
                filing a civil action in which the person seeks to set 
                aside, delay, rescind, withdraw, or prevent submission, 
                review, or approval of an application submitted under 
                subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section or section 
                351(k) of the Public Health Service Act. Such petition 
                and any supplement to such a petition shall describe 
                all information and arguments that form the basis of 
                the relief requested in any civil action described in 
                the previous sentence.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Timely submission of citizen 
                petition.--A petition and any supplement to a petition 
                shall be submitted within 60 days after the person 
                knew, or reasonably should have known, the information 
                that forms the basis of the request made in the 
                petition or supplement.'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) in subparagraph (C), as so 
                redesignated, by--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) in the heading, striking 
                        ``within 150 days'';</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) in clause (i), striking 
                        ``during the 150-day period referred to in 
                        paragraph (1)(F),''; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (iii) amending clause (ii) to read 
                        as follows:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) on or after the date that 
                        is 151 days after the date of submission of the 
                        petition, the Secretary approves or has 
                        approved the application that is the subject of 
                        the petition without having made such a final 
                        decision.'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (D) by amending subparagraph (D), as so 
                redesignated, to read as follows:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) Dismissal of certain civil 
                actions.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) Petition.--If a person files 
                        a civil action against the Secretary in which a 
                        person seeks to set aside, delay, rescind, 
                        withdraw, or prevent submission, review, or 
                        approval of an application submitted under 
                        subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section or 
                        section 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act 
                        without complying with the requirements of 
                        subparagraph (A), the court shall dismiss 
                        without prejudice the action for failure to 
                        exhaust administrative remedies.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Timeliness.--If a person 
                        files a civil action against the Secretary in 
                        which a person seeks to set aside, delay, 
                        rescind, withdraw, or prevent submission, 
                        review, or approval of an application submitted 
                        under subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section 
                        or section 351(k) of the Public Health Service 
                        Act without complying with the requirements of 
                        subparagraph (B), the court shall dismiss with 
                        prejudice the action for failure to timely file 
                        a petition.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) Final response.--If a 
                        civil action is filed against the Secretary 
                        with respect to any issue raised in a petition 
                        timely filed under paragraph (1) in which the 
                        petitioner requests that the Secretary take any 
                        form of action that could, if taken, set aside, 
                        delay, rescind, withdraw, or prevent 
                        submission, review, or approval of an 
                        application submitted under subsection (b)(2) 
                        or (j) of this section or section 351(k) of the 
                        Public Health Service Act before the Secretary 
                        has issued a final response to any such 
                        petition submitted, the court shall dismiss 
                        without prejudice the action for failure to 
                        exhaust administrative remedies.''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (E) in subparagraph (E), as so 
                redesignated--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) in clause (ii), by striking 
                        ``, if issued''; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) in clause (iii), by striking 
                        ``final agency action as defined under 
                        subparagraph (2)(A)'' and inserting ``the final 
                        response to the petitioner''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) in paragraph (4)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) by striking ``Exceptions'' and all 
                that follows through ``This subsection does'' and 
                inserting ``Exceptions--This subsection 
                does'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) by striking subparagraph (B); 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) 
                as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and 
                adjusting the margins accordingly.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 204. PROTECTING ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 351(k)(7) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 262(k)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) Deemed licenses.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) No additional exclusivity 
                        through deeming.--An approved application that 
                        is deemed to be a license for a biological 
                        product under this section pursuant to section 
                        7002(e)(4) of the Biologics Price Competition 
                        and Innovation Act of 2009 shall not be treated 
                        as having been first licensed under subsection 
                        (a) for purposes of subparagraphs (A) and 
                        (B).</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Limitation on 
                        exclusivity.--Subparagraph (C) shall apply to 
                        any reference product, without regard to 
                        whether--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) such product was 
                                first licensed under subsection (a); 
                                or</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the approved 
                                application for such product was deemed 
                                to be a license for a biological 
                                product as described in clause 
                                (i).</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) Applicability.--Any 
                        unexpired period of exclusivity under section 
                        527 or section 505A(c)(1)(A)(ii) of the Federal 
                        Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act with respect to a 
                        biological product shall continue to apply to 
                        such biological product after an approved 
                        application for the biological product is 
                        deemed to be a license for the biological 
                        product as described in clause 
                        (i).''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 205. PREVENTING BLOCKING OF GENERIC DRUGS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I)) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) by striking ``180 days after the date'' and 
        inserting ``180 days after the earlier of the 
        following:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(aa) The date''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(bb) The date on which all of 
                        the following conditions are first 
                        met:</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(AA) An application for 
                                the drug submitted by an applicant 
                                other than a first applicant could 
                                receive approval, if no first applicant 
                                were eligible for 180-day exclusivity 
                                under this clause.</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(BB) Thirty-three months 
                                have passed since the date of 
                                submission of an application for the 
                                drug by one first applicant, if there 
                                is only one first applicant, or, in the 
                                case of more than one first applicant, 
                                33 months have passed since the date of 
                                submission of all such 
                                applications.</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(CC) Approval of an 
                                application for the drug submitted by 
                                at least one first applicant would not 
                                be precluded under clause 
                                (iii).</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(DD) No application for 
                                the drug submitted by any first 
                                applicant is approved at the time the 
                                conditions under subitems (AA), (BB), 
                                and (CC) are all met, regardless of 
                                whether such an application is 
                                subsequently approved.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 206. EDUCATION ON BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Subpart 1 of part F of title III of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 352A. EDUCATION ON BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Internet Website.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may establish, 
        maintain, and operate an internet website to provide 
        educational materials for health care providers, patients, and 
        caregivers, regarding the meaning of the terms, and the 
        standards for review and licensing of, biological products, 
        including biosimilar biological products and interchangeable 
        biosimilar biological products.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Content.--Educational materials provided 
        under paragraph (1) may include explanations of--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) key statutory and regulatory terms, 
                including `biosimilar' and `interchangeable', and 
                clarification regarding the appropriate use of 
                interchangeable biosimilar biological 
                products;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) information related to development 
                programs for biological products, including biosimilar 
                biological products and interchangeable biosimilar 
                biological products and relevant clinical 
                considerations for prescribers, which may include, as 
                appropriate and applicable, information related to the 
                comparability of such biological products;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) the process for reporting adverse 
                events for biological products, including biosimilar 
                biological products and interchangeable biosimilar 
                biological products; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) the relationship between biosimilar 
                biological products and interchangeable biosimilar 
                biological products licensed under section 351(k) and 
                reference products (as defined in section 351(i)), 
                including the standards for review and licensing of 
                each such type of biological product.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Format.--The educational materials provided 
        under paragraph (1) may be--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) in formats such as webinars, 
                continuing medical education modules, videos, fact 
                sheets, infographics, stakeholder toolkits, or other 
                formats as appropriate and applicable; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) tailored for the unique needs of 
                health care providers, patients, caregivers, and other 
                audiences, as the Secretary determines 
                appropriate.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Other information.--In addition to the 
        information described in paragraph (2), the internet website 
        established under paragraph (1) shall include the following 
        information, as a single, searchable database:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) The action package of each 
                biological product licensed under subsection (a) or 
                (k), within 30 days of licensure, or, in the case of a 
                biological product licensed before the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, not later 
                than 1 year after such date of enactment.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) The summary review of each 
                biological product licensed under subsection (a) or 
                (k), within 7 days of licensure, except where such 
                materials require redaction by the Secretary, or, in 
                the case of a biological product licensed before the 
                date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, 
                not later than 1 year after such date of 
                enactment.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Confidential and trade secret information.--
        This subsection does not authorize the disclosure of any trade 
        secret, confidential commercial or financial information, or 
        other matter described in section 552(b) of title 5.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Continuing Medical Education.--The Secretary shall 
advance education and awareness among health care providers regarding 
biological products, including biosimilar biological products and 
interchangeable biosimilar biological products, as appropriate, 
including by developing or improving continuing medical education 
programs that advance the education of such providers on the 
prescribing of, and relevant clinical considerations with respect to 
biological products, including biosimilar biological products and 
interchangeable biosimilar biological products.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 207. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCT INNOVATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 351(j) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
262(j)) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) by striking ``except that a product'' and 
        inserting ``except that--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) a product'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) by striking ``Act.'' and inserting ``Act; 
        and''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) no requirement under such Act regarding an 
        official compendium (as defined in section 201(j) of such Act), 
        or other reference in such Act to an official compendium (as so 
        defined), shall apply with respect to a biological product 
        subject to regulation under this section.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 208. CLARIFYING THE MEANING OF NEW CHEMICAL 
              ENTITY.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is 
amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in section 505 (21 U.S.C. 355)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) in subsection (c)(3)(E)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) in clause (ii), by striking 
                        ``active ingredient (including any ester or 
                        salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
                        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in 
                        section 314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations))''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) in clause (iii), by striking 
                        ``active ingredient (including any ester or 
                        salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
                        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in 
                        section 314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor 
                        regulations))'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) in subsection (j)(5)(F)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) in clause (ii), by striking 
                        ``active ingredient (including any ester or 
                        salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
                        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in 
                        section 314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations))''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) in clause (iii), by striking 
                        ``active ingredient (including any ester or 
                        salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
                        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in 
                        section 314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor 
                        regulations))'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) in subsection (l)(2)(A)(i), by 
                striking ``active ingredient (including any ester or 
                salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting ``active 
                moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
                regulations))'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (D) in subsection (s), in the matter 
                preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' and inserting ``active moiety (as defined 
                by the Secretary in section 314.3 of title 21, Code of 
                Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations))''; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (E) in subsection (u)(1), in the matter 
                preceding subparagraph (A)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) by striking ``active 
                        ingredient (including any ester or salt of the 
                        active ingredient)'' and inserting ``active 
                        moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 
                        314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations 
                        (or any successor regulations))''; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) by striking ``same active 
                        ingredient'' and inserting ``same active 
                        moiety'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in section 512(c)(2)(F) (21 U.S.C. 
        360b(c)(2)(F))--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) in clause (i), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' and inserting ``active moiety (as defined 
                by the Secretary in section 314.3 of title 21, Code of 
                Federal Regulations (or any successor 
                regulations))'';</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' and inserting ``active moiety (as defined 
                by the Secretary in section 314.3 of title 21, Code of 
                Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations))''; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) in clause (v), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' and inserting ``active moiety (as defined 
                by the Secretary in section 314.3 of title 21, Code of 
                Federal Regulations (or any successor 
                regulations))'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) in section 524(a)(4)(C) (21 U.S.C. 
        360n(a)(4)(C)), by striking ``active ingredient (including any 
        ester or salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 
        of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
        regulations))'';</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (4) in section 529(a)(4)(A)(ii) (21 U.S.C. 
        360ff(a)(4)(A)(ii)), by striking ``active ingredient (including 
        any ester or salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 
        of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
        regulations))''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (5) in section 565A(a)(4)(D) (21 U.S.C. 360bbb-
        4a(a)(4)(D)), by striking ``active ingredient (including any 
        ester or salt of the active ingredient)'' and inserting 
        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 
        of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
        regulations))''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 209. STREAMLINING THE TRANSITION OF BIOLOGICAL 
              PRODUCTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 7002(e)(4) of the Biologics Price Competition and 
Innovation Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-148) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: ``With respect to an application for a biological 
product under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 355) with a filing date that is not later than September 23, 
2019, the Secretary shall continue to review and approve such 
application under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (21 U.S.C. 355), even if such review and approval process continues 
after March 23, 2020. Effective on the later of March 23, 2020, or the 
date of approval of such application under such section 505, such 
approved application shall be deemed to be a license for the biological 
product under section 351 of the Public Health Service 
Act.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 210. ORPHAN DRUG CLARIFICATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 527(c) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 360cc(c)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Applicability.--This subsection applies to 
        any drug designated under section 526 that was approved under 
        section 505 of this Act or licensed under section 351 of the 
        Public Health Service Act after the date of enactment of the 
        FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, regardless of the date of on 
        which such drug was designated under section 526.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 211. PROMPT APPROVAL OF DRUGS RELATED TO SAFETY 
              INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 355) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(z) Prompt Approval of Drugs When Safety Information Is 
Added to Labeling.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) General rule.--A drug for which an 
        application has been submitted or approved under subsection 
        (b)(2) or (j) shall not be considered ineligible for approval 
        under this section or misbranded under section 502 on the basis 
        that the labeling of the drug omits safety information, 
        including contraindications, warnings, precautions, dosing, 
        administration, or other information pertaining to safety, when 
        the omitted safety information is protected by exclusivity 
        under clause (iii) or (iv) of subsection (j)(5)(F), clause 
        (iii) or (iv) of subsection (c)(3)(E), or section 527(a), or by 
        an extension of such exclusivity under section 505A or 
        505E.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Labeling.--Notwithstanding clauses (iii) and 
        (iv) of subsection (j)(5)(F), clauses (iii) and (iv) of 
        subsection (c)(3)(E), or section 527, the Secretary shall 
        require that the labeling of a drug approved pursuant to an 
        application submitted under subsection (b)(2) or (j) that omits 
        safety information described in paragraph (1) include a 
        statement of any appropriate safety information that the 
        Secretary considers necessary to assure safe use.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Availability and scope of exclusivity.--This 
        subsection does not affect--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the availability or scope of 
                exclusivity or an extension of exclusivity described in 
                subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 
                505A(o)(3);</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) the question of the eligibility for 
                approval under this section of any application 
                described in subsection (b)(2) or (j) that omits any 
                other aspect of labeling protected by exclusivity 
                under--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) clause (iii) or (iv) of 
                        subsection (j)(5)(F);</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) clause (iii) or (iv) of 
                        subsection (c)(3)(E); or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) section 527(a); 
                        or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) except as expressly provided in 
                paragraphs (1) and (2), the operation of this section 
                or section 527.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 212. CONDITIONS OF USE FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL 
              PRODUCTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 351(k)(2)(A)(iii) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262(k)(2)(A)(iii)) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``; and'' and 
        inserting a semicolon;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in subclause (II), by striking the period and 
        inserting ``; and''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) may include 
                                information to show that the conditions 
                                of use prescribed, recommended, or 
                                suggested in the labeling proposed for 
                                the biological product have been 
                                previously approved for the reference 
                                product.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 213. MODERNIZING THE LABELING OF CERTAIN GENERIC 
              DRUGS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 351 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 503C the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 503D. PROCESS TO UPDATE LABELING FOR CERTAIN 
              DRUGS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this 
section:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) The term `covered drug' means a drug 
        approved under section 505(c)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) for which there are no unexpired 
                patents included in the list under section 505(j)(7) 
                and no unexpired period of market 
                exclusivity;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) for which the approval of the 
                application has been withdrawn for reasons other than 
                safety or effectiveness; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) for which, with respect to the 
                labeling--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) new scientific evidence is 
                        available regarding the conditions of use of 
                        the drug;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) there is a relevant 
                        accepted use in clinical practice that is not 
                        reflected in the approved labeling; 
                        or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) the labeling of such drug 
                        does not reflect current legal and regulatory 
                        requirements.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) The term `period of market exclusivity', 
        with respect to a drug approved under section 505(c), means any 
        period of market exclusivity under clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) 
        of section 505(c)(3)(E), clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of section 
        505(j)(5)(F), or section 505A, 505E, or 527.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) The term `generic version' means a drug 
        approved under section 505(j) whose reference drug is a covered 
        drug.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) The term `relevant accepted use' means a use 
        for a drug in clinical practice that is supported by scientific 
        evidence that appears to the Secretary to meet the standards 
        for approval under section 505.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) The term `selected drug' means a covered 
        drug for which the Secretary has determined through the process 
        under subsection (c) that the labeling should be 
        changed.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Identification of Covered Drugs.--The Secretary may 
identify covered drugs for which labeling updates would provide a 
public health benefit. To assist in identifying covered drugs, the 
Secretary may do one or both of the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Enter into cooperative agreements or 
        contracts with public or private entities to review the 
        available scientific evidence concerning such drugs.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Seek public input concerning such drugs, 
        including input on whether there is a relevant accepted use in 
        clinical practice that is not reflected in the approved 
        labeling of such drugs or whether new scientific evidence is 
        available regarding the conditions of use for such drug, by--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) holding one or more public 
                meetings;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) opening a public docket for the 
                submission of public comments; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) other means, as the Secretary 
                determines appropriate.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Selection of Drugs for Updating.--If the Secretary 
determines, with respect to a covered drug, that the available 
scientific evidence meets the standards under section 505 for adding or 
modifying information to the labeling or providing supplemental 
information to the labeling regarding the use of the covered drug, the 
Secretary may initiate the process under subsection (d).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Initiation of the Process of Updating.--If the 
Secretary determines that labeling changes are appropriate for a 
selected drug pursuant to subsection (c), the Secretary shall provide 
notice to the holders of approved applications for a generic version of 
such drug that--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) summarizes the findings supporting the 
        determination of the Secretary that the available scientific 
        evidence meets the standards under section 505 for adding or 
        modifying information or providing supplemental information to 
        the labeling of the covered drug pursuant to subsection 
        (c);</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) provides a clear statement regarding the 
        additional, modified, or supplemental information for such 
        labeling, according to the determination by the Secretary 
        (including, as applicable, modifications to add the relevant 
        accepted use to the labeling of the drug as an additional 
        indication for the drug); and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) states whether the statement under paragraph 
        (2) applies to the selected drug as a class of covered drugs or 
        only as to a specific drug product.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Response to Notification.--Within 30 days of receipt 
of notification provided by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (d), 
the holder of an approved application for a generic version of the 
selected drug shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) agree to change the approved labeling to 
        reflect the additional, modified, or supplemental information 
        the Secretary has determined to be appropriate; or</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) notify the Secretary that the holder of the 
        approved application does not believe that the requested 
        labeling changes are warranted and submit a statement detailing 
        the reasons why such changes are not warranted.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Review of Application Holder's Response.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Upon receipt of the application 
        holder's response, the Secretary shall promptly review each 
        statement received under subsection (e)(2) and determine which 
        labeling changes pursuant to the Secretary's notice under 
        subsection (d) are appropriate, if any. If the Secretary 
        disagrees with the reasons why such labeling changes are not 
        warranted, the Secretary shall provide opportunity for 
        discussions with the application holders to reach agreement on 
        whether the labeling for the covered drug should be updated to 
        reflect current scientific evidence, and if so, the content of 
        such labeling changes.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Changes to labeling.--After considering all 
        responses from the holder of an approved application under 
        paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (e), and any discussion 
        under paragraph (1), the Secretary may order such holder to 
        make the labeling changes the Secretary determines are 
        appropriate. Such holder of an approved application shall--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) update its paper labeling for the 
                drug at the next printing of that labeling;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) update any electronic labeling for 
                the drug within 30 days; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) submit the revised labeling through 
                the form, `Supplement--Changes Being 
                Effected'.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Violation.--If the holder of an approved application 
for the generic version of the selected drug does not comply with the 
requirements of subsection (f)(2), such generic version of the selected 
drug shall be deemed to be misbranded under section 502.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(h) Limitations; Generic Drugs.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--With respect to any labeling 
        change required under this section, the generic version shall 
        be deemed to have the same conditions of use and the same 
        labeling as a reference drug for purposes of clauses (i) and 
        (v) of section 505(j)(2)(A). Any labeling change so required 
        shall not have any legal effect for the applicant that is 
        different than the legal effect that would have resulted if a 
        supplemental application had been submitted and approved to 
        conform the labeling of the generic version to a change in the 
        labeling of the reference drug.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Supplemental applications.--Changes to 
        labeling made in accordance with this paragraph shall not be 
        eligible for an exclusivity period under this Act.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(i) Drug Product Classes.--In the case of a selected 
drug for which the labeling changes ordered by the Secretary under 
subsection (d)(2) are required for a class of covered drugs, such 
labeling changes shall be made for generic versions of such drug in 
that class.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(j) Rules of Construction.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Approval standards.--This section shall not 
        be construed as altering the applicability of the standards for 
        approval of an application under section 505. No order shall be 
        issued under this subsection unless the evidence supporting the 
        changed labeling meets the standards for approval applicable to 
        any change to labeling under section 505.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Removal of information.--Nothing in this 
        section shall be construed to give the Secretary additional 
        authority to remove approved indications for drugs, other than 
        the authority to remove certain indications from the labels of 
        certain covered drugs, as described in this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(k) Reports.--Not later than 4 years after the date of 
the enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act and every 4 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, a report that--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) describes the actions of the Secretary under 
        this section, including--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the number of covered drugs and 
                description of the types of drugs the Secretary has 
                selected for labeling changes and the rationale for 
                such recommended changes; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) the number of times the Secretary 
                entered into discussions concerning a disagreement with 
                an application holder or holders and a summary of the 
                decision regarding a labeling change, if any; 
                and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) includes any recommendations of the 
        Secretary for modifying the program under this 
        section.''.</DELETED>

  <DELETED>TITLE III--IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTH CARE</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 301. INCREASING TRANSPARENCY BY REMOVING GAG CLAUSES ON 
              PRICE AND QUALITY INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by section 103, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729B. INCREASING TRANSPARENCY BY REMOVING GAG CLAUSES 
              ON PRICE AND QUALITY INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Increasing Price and Quality Transparency for Plan 
Sponsors and Consumers.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Group health plans.--A group health plan or 
        a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance 
        coverage may not enter into an agreement with a health care 
        provider, network or association of providers, third-party 
        administrator, or other service provider offering access to a 
        network of providers that would directly or indirectly restrict 
        a group health plan or health insurance issuer from--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) providing provider-specific cost or 
                quality of care information, through a consumer 
                engagement tool or any other means, to referring 
                providers, the plan sponsor, enrollees, or eligible 
                enrollees of the plan or coverage;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) electronically accessing de-
                identified claims and encounter data for each enrollee 
                in the plan or coverage, upon request and consistent 
                with the privacy regulations promulgated pursuant to 
                section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
                Accountability Act, the amendments to this Act made by 
                the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 
                and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, with 
                respect to the applicable health plan or health 
                insurance coverage, including, on a per claim basis--
                </DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) financial information, such 
                        as the allowed amount, or any other claim-
                        related financial obligations included in the 
                        provider contract;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) provider information, 
                        including name and clinical 
                        designation;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) service codes; 
                        or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) any other data element 
                        normally included in claim or encounter 
                        transactions when received by a plan or issuer; 
                        or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) sharing data described in 
                subparagraph (A) or (B) with a business associate as 
                defined in section 160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal 
                Regulations (or successor regulations), consistent with 
                the privacy regulations promulgated pursuant to section 
                264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
                Accountability Act, the amendments to this Act made by 
                the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 
                and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
                1990.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Individual health insurance coverage.--A 
        health insurance issuer offering individual health insurance 
        coverage may not enter into an agreement with a health care 
        provider, network or association of providers, or other service 
        provider offering access to a network of providers that would, 
        directly or indirectly restrict the health insurance issuer 
        from--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) providing provider-specific price or 
                quality of care information, through a consumer 
                engagement tool or any other means, to referring 
                providers or the plan sponsor, enrollees, or eligible 
                enrollees of the plan or coverage; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) sharing data described in 
                subparagraph (A) with a business associate as defined 
                in section 160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal 
                Regulations (or successor regulations), consistent with 
                the privacy regulations promulgated pursuant to section 
                264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
                Accountability Act, the amendments to this Act made by 
                the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 
                and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, for 
                plan design, plan administration, and plan, financial, 
                legal, and quality improvement activities.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Clarification regarding public disclosure of 
        information.--Nothing in paragraph (1)(A) or (2)(A) prevents a 
        health care provider, network or association of providers, or 
        other service provider from placing reasonable restrictions on 
        the public disclosure of the information described in such 
        paragraphs (1) and (2).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Attestation.--A group health plan or a 
        health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
        insurance coverage shall annually submit to, as applicable, the 
        applicable authority described in section 2723 or the Secretary 
        of Labor, an attestation that such plan or issuer is in 
        compliance with the requirements of this subsection.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
        section shall be construed to otherwise limit group health plan 
        or plan sponsor access to data currently permitted under the 
        privacy regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of 
        the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, the 
        amendments to this Act made by the Genetic Information 
        Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, and the Americans with 
        Disabilities Act of 1990.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 302. BANNING ANTICOMPETITIVE TERMS IN FACILITY AND 
              INSURANCE CONTRACTS THAT LIMIT ACCESS TO HIGHER QUALITY, 
              LOWER COST CARE.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Section 2729B of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by section 301, is amended by adding at the end 
the following:</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Protecting Health Plans Network Design 
Flexibility.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--A group health plan or a health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage shall not enter into an agreement with a provider, 
        network or association of providers, or other service provider 
        offering access to a network of service providers if such 
        agreement, directly or indirectly--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) restricts the group health plan or 
                health insurance issuer from--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) directing or steering 
                        enrollees to other health care providers; 
                        or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) offering incentives to 
                        encourage enrollees to utilize specific health 
                        care providers;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) requires the group health plan or 
                health insurance issuer to enter into any additional 
                contract with an affiliate of the provider as a 
                condition of entering into a contract with such 
                provider;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) requires the group health plan or 
                health insurance issuer to agree to payment rates or 
                other terms for any affiliate not party to the contract 
                of the provider involved; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) restricts other group health plans 
                or health insurance issuers not party to the contract, 
                from paying a lower rate for items or services than the 
                contracting plan or issuer pays for such items or 
                services.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Additional requirement for self-insured 
        plans.--A self-insured group health plan shall not enter into 
        an agreement with a provider, network or association of 
        providers, third-party administrator, or other service provider 
        offering access to a network of providers if such agreement, 
        directly or indirectly requires the group health plan to 
        certify, attest, or otherwise confirm in writing that the group 
        health plan is bound by the terms of the contract between the 
        service provider and a third-party administrator that the group 
        health plan is not party to and is not allowed to 
        review.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Exception for certain group model issuers.--
        Paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply to a group health plan or a 
        health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
        insurance coverage with respect to a health maintenance 
        organization (as defined in section 2791(b)(3)) if such health 
        maintenance organization operates primarily through exclusive 
        contracts with multi-specialty physician groups, nor to any 
        arrangement between such a health maintenance organization and 
        its affiliates.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Attestation.--A group health plan or a 
        health insurance issuer offering group or individual health 
        insurance coverage shall annually submit to, as applicable, the 
        applicable authority described in section 2723 or the Secretary 
        of Labor, an attestation that such plan or issuer is in 
        compliance with the requirements of this subsection.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Maintenance of Existing HIPAA, GINA, and ADA 
Protections.--Nothing in this section shall modify, reduce, or 
eliminate the existing privacy protections and standards provided by 
reason of State and Federal law, including the requirements of parts 
160 and 164 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
regulations).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Regulations.--The Secretary, in coordination with 
the Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of the Treasury, not later 
than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
Act, shall promulgate regulations to carry out this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to limit network design or cost or quality initiatives by 
a group health plan or health insurance issuer, including accountable 
care organizations, exclusive provider organizations, networks that 
tier providers by cost or quality or steer enrollees to centers of 
excellence, or other pay-for-performance programs.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2729B of the Public Health 
Service Act (as added by section 301 and amended by subsection (a)) 
shall apply with respect to any contract entered into after the date of 
enactment of this Act. With respect to an applicable contract that is 
in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, such section 2729B 
shall apply on the earlier of the date of renewal of such contract or 3 
years after such date of enactment.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 303. DESIGNATION OF A NONGOVERNMENTAL, NONPROFIT 
              TRANSPARENCY ORGANIZATION TO LOWER AMERICANS' HEALTH CARE 
              COSTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Subpart C of part 7 of subtitle B of 
title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1191 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 735. DESIGNATION OF A NONGOVERNMENTAL, NONPROFIT 
              TRANSPARENCY ORGANIZATION TO LOWER AMERICANS' HEALTH CARE 
              COSTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, not later than 6 months after 
the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, shall have in 
effect a contract with a nonprofit entity to support the establishment 
and maintenance of a database that receives and utilizes health care 
claims information and related information and issues reports that are 
available to the public and authorized users, and are submitted to the 
Department of Labor.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Requirements.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--The database established under 
        subsection (a) shall--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) improve transparency by using de-
                identified health care data to--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) inform patients about the 
                        cost, quality, and value of their 
                        care;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) assist providers and 
                        hospitals, as they work with patients, to make 
                        informed choices about care;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) enable providers, 
                        hospitals, and communities to improve services 
                        and outcomes for patients by benchmarking their 
                        performance against that of other providers, 
                        hospitals, and communities;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) enable purchasers, 
                        including employers, employee organizations, 
                        and health plans, to develop value-based 
                        purchasing models, improve quality, and reduce 
                        the cost of health care and insurance coverage 
                        for enrollees;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) enable employers and 
                        employee organizations to evaluate network 
                        design and construction, and the cost of care 
                        for enrollees;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vi) facilitate State-led 
                        initiatives to lower health care costs and 
                        improve quality; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vii) promote competition based 
                        on quality and cost;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) collect medical claims, prescription 
                drug claims, and remittance data consistent with the 
                protections and requirements of subsection 
                (d);</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) be established in such a manner that 
                allows the data collected pursuant to subparagraph (B) 
                to be shared with any State all-payer claims database 
                or regional database operated with authorization from 
                States, at cost, using a standardized format, if such 
                State or regional database also submits claims data to 
                the database established under this section; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) be available to--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) the Director of the 
                        Congressional Budget Office, the Comptroller 
                        General of the United States, the Executive 
                        Director of the Medicare Payment Advisory 
                        Commission, and the Executive Director of the 
                        Medicaid and CHIP Payment Advisory Commission, 
                        upon request, subject to the privacy and 
                        security requirements of authorized users under 
                        subsection (e)(2); and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) authorized users, including 
                        employers, employee organizations, providers, 
                        researchers, and policymakers, subject to 
                        subsection (e).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Privacy and security.--The entity receiving 
        a contract under subsection (a) shall--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) be subject to the breach 
                notification rule under subpart D of part 164 of title 
                45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
                regulations), the security rule under part 160 and 
                subparts A and C of part 164 of title 45, Code of 
                Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations), and 
                the privacy rule under part 160 and subparts A and E of 
                part 164 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
                any successor regulations); and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) consistent with the requirements and 
                prohibitions in the regulations promulgated under 
                section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
                Accountability Act of 1996--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) ensure that the database 
                        under subsection (a) is capable of--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) receiving data under 
                                subsection (d);</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) providing data 
                                access to authorized users; 
                                and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) storing data on 
                                secure servers in a manner that is 
                                consistent with the privacy, security, 
                                and breach notification requirements 
                                under section 13402 of the HITECH Act 
                                and under the regulations promulgated 
                                under section 264(c) of the Health 
                                Insurance Portability and 
                                Accountability Act of 1996;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) not disclose to the public 
                        any individually identifiable health 
                        information or proprietary financial 
                        information;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) strictly limit staff 
                        access to the data to staff with appropriate 
                        training, clearance, and background checks and 
                        require regular privacy and security 
                        training;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) maintain effective security 
                        standards for transferring data or making data 
                        available to authorized users;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) develop a process for 
                        providing access to data to authorized users, 
                        in a secure manner that maintains privacy and 
                        confidentiality of data;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vi) adhere to current best 
                        security practices with respect to the 
                        management and use of such data for health 
                        services research, in accordance with 
                        applicable Federal privacy law; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vii) report on the security 
                        methods of the entity to the Secretary, the 
                        Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
                        Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on 
                        Education and Labor of the House of 
                        Representatives.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Consultation.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Advisory committee.--Not later than 
                180 days after the date of enactment of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act, the Secretary shall convene an 
                Advisory Committee (referred to in this section as the 
                `Committee'), consisting of 11 members, to advise the 
                Secretary, the contracting entity, and Congress on the 
                establishment, operations, and use of the database 
                established under this section.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Membership.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) Appointment.--In accordance 
                        with clause (ii), the Secretary, in 
                        consultation with the Secretary of Health and 
                        Human Services, and the Comptroller General of 
                        the United States shall, not later than 1 year 
                        after the date of enactment of the Lower Health 
                        Care Costs Act, appoint members to the 
                        Committee who have distinguished themselves in 
                        the fields of health services research, health 
                        economics, health informatics, or the 
                        governance of State all-payer claims databases, 
                        or who represent organizations likely to submit 
                        data to or use the database, including 
                        patients, employers, or employee organizations 
                        that sponsor group health plans, health care 
                        providers, health insurance issuers, and third-
                        party administrators of group health plans. 
                        Such members shall serve 3-year terms on a 
                        staggered basis. Vacancies on the Committee 
                        shall be filled by appointment consistent with 
                        this subsection not later than 3 months after 
                        the vacancy arises.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Composition.--In accordance 
                        with clause (i)--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) the Secretary, in 
                                consultation with the Secretary of 
                                Health and Human Services, shall 
                                appoint to the Committee--</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(aa) 1 member 
                                        selected by the Secretary, in 
                                        coordination with the Secretary 
                                        of Health and Human Services, 
                                        to serve as the chair of the 
                                        Committee;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(bb) the 
                                        Assistant Secretary for 
                                        Planning and Evaluation of the 
                                        Department of Health and Human 
                                        Services;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(cc) 1 
                                        representative of the Centers 
                                        for Medicare & Medicaid 
                                        Services;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(dd) 1 
                                        representative of the Agency 
                                        for Health Research and 
                                        Quality;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(ee) 1 
                                        representative of the Office 
                                        for Civil Rights of the 
                                        Department of Health and Human 
                                        Services with expertise in data 
                                        privacy and security; 
                                        and</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(ff) 1 
                                        representative of the National 
                                        Center for Health Statistics; 
                                        and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the Comptroller 
                                General of the United States shall 
                                appoint to the Committee--</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(aa) 1 
                                        representative of an employer 
                                        that sponsors a group health 
                                        plan;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(bb) 1 
                                        representative of an employee 
                                        organization that sponsors a 
                                        group health plan;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(cc) 1 academic 
                                        researcher with expertise in 
                                        health economics or health 
                                        services research;</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(dd) 1 patient 
                                        advocate; and</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(ee) 2 
                                        additional members.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Duties.--The Committee shall--
                </DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) assist and advise the 
                        Secretary on the management of the contract 
                        under subsection (a);</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) assist and advise the 
                        entity receiving the contract under subsection 
                        (a) in establishing--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) the scope and format 
                                of the data to be submitted under 
                                subsection (d);</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the appropriate 
                                uses of data by authorized users, 
                                including developing standards for the 
                                approval of requests by organizations 
                                to access and use the data; 
                                and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) the appropriate 
                                formats and methods for making reports 
                                and analyses based on the database to 
                                the public;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) conduct an annual review 
                        of whether data was used according to the 
                        appropriate uses as described in clause 
                        (ii)(II), and advise the designated entity on 
                        using the data for authorized 
                        purposes;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) report, as appropriate, to 
                        the Secretary and Congress on the operation of 
                        the database and opportunities to better 
                        achieve the objectives of this 
                        section;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) establish additional 
                        restrictions on researchers who receive 
                        compensation from entities described in 
                        subsection (e)(2)(B)(ii), in order to protect 
                        proprietary financial information; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(vi) establish objectives for 
                        research and public reporting.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) State requirements.--A State may require 
        health insurance issuers and other payers to submit claims data 
        to the database established under this section, provided that 
        such data is submitted in a form and manner established by the 
        Secretary, and pursuant to subsection (d)(4)(B).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Sanctions.--The Secretary shall take 
        appropriate action to sanction users who attempt to re-identify 
        data accessed pursuant to paragraph (1)(D).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Contract Requirements.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Competitive procedures.--The Secretary shall 
        enter into the contract under subsection (a) using full and 
        open competition procedures pursuant to chapter 33 of title 41, 
        United States Code.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to enter 
        into a contract described in subsection (a), an entity shall--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) be a private nonprofit entity 
                governed by a board that includes representatives of 
                the academic research community and individuals with 
                expertise in employer-sponsored insurance, research 
                using health care claims data and actuarial 
                analysis;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) conduct its business in an open and 
                transparent manner that provides the opportunity for 
                public comment on its activities; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) agree to maintain an active 
                certification as a qualified entity under section 
                1874(e) of the Social Security Act (or any successor 
                program) throughout the contract period.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Considerations.--In awarding the contract 
        under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider an entity's 
        experience in--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) health care claims data collection, 
                aggregation, quality assurance, analysis, and 
                security;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) supporting academic research on 
                health costs, spending, and utilization for and by 
                privately insured patients;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) working with large health insurance 
                issuers and third-party administrators to assemble a 
                national claims database;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) effectively collaborating with and 
                engaging stakeholders to develop reports;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(E) meeting budgets and timelines, 
                including in connection with report generation; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(F) facilitating the creation of, or 
                supporting, State all-payer claims databases.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Contract term.--A contract awarded under 
        this section shall be for a period of 5 years, and may be 
        renewed after a subsequent competitive bidding process under 
        this section.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Transition of contract.--If the Secretary, 
        following a competitive process at the end of the contract 
        period, selects a new entity to maintain the database, all data 
        shall be transferred to the new entity according to a schedule 
        and process to be determined by the Secretary. Upon termination 
        of a contract, no entity may keep data held by the database or 
        disclose such data to any entity other than the entity so 
        designated by the Secretary. The Secretary shall include 
        enforcement terms in any contract with an organization chosen 
        under this section, to ensure the timely transfer of all data 
        to a new entity in the event of contract termination.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Receiving Health Information.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Requirements.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--An applicable self-
                insured group health plan shall, through its health 
                insurance issuer, third-party administrator, pharmacy 
                benefit manager, or other entity designated by the 
                group health plan, electronically submit all claims 
                data with respect to the plan, pursuant to subparagraph 
                (B).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Scope of information and format of 
                submission.--The entity awarded the contract under 
                subsection (a), in consultation with the Committee 
                described in subsection (b)(3), and pursuant to the 
                privacy and security requirements of subsection (b)(2), 
                shall--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) specify the data elements 
                        required to be submitted under subparagraph 
                        (A), which shall include all data related to 
                        transactions described in subparagraphs (A) and 
                        (E) of section 1173(a)(2) of the Social 
                        Security Act, including all data elements 
                        normally present in such transactions when 
                        adjudicated, and enrollment 
                        information;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) specify the form and manner 
                        for such submissions, and the historical period 
                        to be included in the initial submission; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) offer an automated 
                        submission option to minimize administrative 
                        burdens for entities required to submit 
                        data.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) De-identification of data.--The 
                entity awarded the contract under subsection (a) 
                shall--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) establish a process under 
                        which data is de-identified in accordance with 
                        section 164.514(a) of title 45, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations), 
                        while retaining the ability to link data 
                        longitudinally for the purposes of research on 
                        cost and quality, and the ability to complete 
                        risk adjustment and geographic 
                        analysis;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) ensure that any third-party 
                        subcontractors who perform the de-
                        identification process described in clause (i) 
                        retain the minimum necessary information to 
                        perform such a process, and adhere to effective 
                        security and encryption practices in data 
                        storage and transmission;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) store claims and other 
                        data collected under this subsection only in 
                        de-identified form, in accordance with section 
                        164.514(a) of title 45, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations); 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) ensure that data is 
                        encrypted, in accordance with the regulations 
                        promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
                        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
                        1996.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Applicable self-insured group health plan.--
        For purposes of paragraph (1), a self-insured group health plan 
        is an applicable self-insured group health plan if such plan is 
        self-administered, or is administered by a health insurance 
        issuer or third-party administrator that meets one or both of 
        the following criteria:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Administers health benefits for more 
                than 50,000 enrollees.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Is one of the 5 largest 
                administrators or issuers of self-insured group health 
                plans in a State in which such administrator operates, 
                as measured by the number of enrollees.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Issuers and third-party administrators.--In 
        the case of a health insurance issuer or third-party 
        administrator that is required under this subsection to submit 
        claims data with respect to an applicable self-insured group 
        health plan, such issuer or administrator shall submit claims 
        data with respect to all self-insured group health plans that 
        the issuer or administrator administers, including such plans 
        that are not applicable self-insured group health plans, as 
        described in paragraph (2).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Receiving other information.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Medicare data.--The entity awarded 
                the contract under subsection (a) shall maintain active 
                certification as a qualified entity pursuant to section 
                1874(e) of the Social Security Act for the term of the 
                contract awarded under subsection (a).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) State data.--The entity awarded the 
                contract under subsection (a) shall collect data from 
                State all-payer claims databases that seek access to 
                the database established under this section.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Availability of data.--An entity required to 
        submit data under this subsection may not place any 
        restrictions on the use of such data by authorized 
        users.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Uses of Information.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--The entity awarded the contract 
        under subsection (a) shall make the database available to users 
        who are authorized under this subsection, at cost, and reports 
        and analyses based on the data available to the public with no 
        charge.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Authorization of users.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--An entity may request 
                authorization by the entity awarded the contract under 
                subsection (a) for access to the database in accordance 
                with this paragraph.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Application.--An entity desiring 
                authorization under this paragraph shall submit to the 
                entity awarded the contract an application for such 
                access, which shall include--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) in the case of an entity 
                        requesting access for research purposes--
                        </DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) a description of the 
                                uses and methodologies for evaluating 
                                health system performance using such 
                                data; and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) documentation of 
                                approval of the research by an 
                                institutional review board, if 
                                applicable for a particular plan of 
                                research; or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) in the case of an entity 
                        such as an employer, health insurance issuer, 
                        third-party administrator, or health care 
                        provider, requesting access for the purpose of 
                        quality improvement or cost-containment, a 
                        description of the intended uses for such 
                        data.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Requirements.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) Research.--Upon approval of 
                        an application for research purposes under 
                        subparagraph (B)(i), the authorized user shall 
                        enter into a data use and confidentiality 
                        agreement with the entity awarded the contract 
                        under subsection (a), which shall include a 
                        prohibition on attempts to reidentify and 
                        disclose protected health information and 
                        proprietary financial information.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Quality improvement and 
                        cost-containment.--In consultation with the 
                        Committee described in subsection (b)(3), the 
                        Secretary shall, through rulemaking, establish 
                        the form and manner in which authorized users 
                        described in subparagraph (B)(ii) may access 
                        data. Data provided to such authorized users 
                        shall be provided in a form and manner such 
                        that users may not obtain individually 
                        identifiable price information with respect to 
                        direct competitors. Upon approval, such 
                        authorized user shall enter into a data use and 
                        confidentiality agreement with the 
                        entity.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) Customized reports.--
                        Employers and employer organizations may 
                        request customized reports from the entity 
                        awarded the contract under subsection (a), at 
                        cost, subject to the requirements of this 
                        section with respect to privacy, security, and 
                        proprietary financial information.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) Non-customized reports.--
                        The entity awarded the contract under 
                        subsection (a), in consultation with the 
                        Committee, shall make available to all 
                        authorized users aggregate data sets, free of 
                        charge.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Funding.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Initial funding.--There are authorized to be 
        appropriated, and there are appropriated, out of monies in the 
        Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $20,000,000 for fiscal 
        year 2020, for the implementation of the initial contract and 
        establishment of the database under this section.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Ongoing funding.--There are authorized to be 
        appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2021 through 
        2025, for purposes of carrying out this section (other than the 
        grant program under subsection (h)).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Annual Report.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Submission.--Not later than March 1, 2021, 
        and March 1 of each year thereafter, the entity receiving the 
        contract under subsection (a) shall submit to Congress, the 
        Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary of Health and Human 
        Services, and publish online for access by the general public, 
        a report containing a description of--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) trends in the price, utilization, 
                and total spending on health care services, including a 
                geographic analysis of differences in such 
                trends;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) limitations in the data 
                set;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) progress towards the objectives of 
                this section; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) the performance by the entity of the 
                duties required under such contract.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Public reports and research.--The entity 
        receiving a contract under subsection (a) shall, in 
        coordination with authorized users, make analyses and research 
        available to the public on an ongoing basis to promote the 
        objectives of this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(h) Grants to States.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation 
        with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, may award 
        grants to States for the purpose of establishing and 
        maintaining State all-payer claims databases that improve 
        transparency of data in order to meet the goals of subsection 
        (a)(1).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Requirement.--To be eligible to receive the 
        funding under paragraph (1), a State shall submit data to the 
        database as described in subsection (b)(1)(C), using the format 
        described in subsection (d)(1).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Funding.--There is authorized to be 
        appropriated $100,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2020 
        through 2029 for the purpose of awarding grants to States under 
        this subsection.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(i) Exemption From Public Disclosure.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Claims data provided to the 
        database, and the database itself shall not be considered 
        public records and shall be exempt from public disclosure 
        requirements.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Restrictions on uses for certain 
        proceedings.--Data disclosed to authorized users shall not be 
        subject to discovery or admission as public information, or 
        evidence in judicial or administrative proceedings without 
        consent of the affected parties.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(j) Definitions.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Protected health information.--The term 
        `protected health information' has the meaning given such term 
        in section 160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
        any successor regulations).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Proprietary financial information.--The term 
        `proprietary financial information' means data that would 
        disclose the terms of a specific contract between an individual 
        health care provider or facility and a specific group health 
        plan, Medicaid managed care organization or other managed care 
        entity, or health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
        coverage.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(k) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to affect or modify enforcement of the privacy, security, 
or breach notification rules promulgated under section 264(c) of the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (or 
successor regulations).''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) GAO Report.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the 
        United States shall conduct a study on--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) the performance of the entity awarded 
                a contract under section 735(a) of the Employee 
                Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as added by 
                subsection (a), under such contract;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) the privacy and security of the 
                information reported to the entity; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) the costs incurred by such entity in 
                performing such duties.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the 
        effective date of the first contract entered into under section 
        735(a) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
        as added by subsection (a), and again not later than 4 years 
        after such effective date, the Comptroller General of the 
        United States shall submit to Congress a report containing the 
        results of the study conducted under paragraph (1), together 
        with recommendations for such legislation and administrative 
        action as the Comptroller General determines 
        appropriate.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 
1 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 734 the following new 
item:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``Sec. 735. Designation of a nongovernmental, nonprofit 
                            transparency organization to lower 
                            Americans' health care costs.''.

<DELETED>SEC. 304. PROTECTING PATIENTS AND IMPROVING THE ACCURACY OF 
              PROVIDER DIRECTORY INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by sections 301 
and 302, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729C. PROTECTING PATIENTS AND IMPROVING THE ACCURACY 
              OF PROVIDER DIRECTORY INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Network Status of Providers.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Beginning on the date that is 
        one year after the date of enactment of this section, a group 
        health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group or 
        individual health insurance coverage shall--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) establish business processes to 
                ensure that all enrollees in such plan or coverage 
                receive proof of a health care provider's network 
                status--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) through a written electronic 
                        communication from the plan or issuer to the 
                        enrollee, as soon as practicable and not later 
                        than 1 business day after a telephone inquiry 
                        is made by such enrollee for such information; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) in real-time through an 
                        online health care provider directory search 
                        tool maintained by the plan or issuer; 
                        and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) include in any print directory a 
                disclosure that the information included in the 
                directory is accurate as of the date of the last data 
                update and that enrollees or prospective enrollees 
                should consult the group health plan or issuer's 
                electronic provider directory on its website or call a 
                specified customer service telephone number to obtain 
                the most current provider directory 
                information.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Group health plan and health insurance 
        issuer business processes.--Beginning on the date that is one 
        year after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
        Act, a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering 
        group or individual health insurance coverage shall establish 
        business processes to--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) verify and update, at least once 
                every 90 days, the provider directory information for 
                all providers included in the online health care 
                provider directory search tool described in paragraph 
                (1)(A)(ii); and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) remove any provider from such online 
                directory search tool if such provider has not verified 
                the directory information within the previous 6 months 
                or the plan or issuer has been unable to verify the 
                provider's network participation.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Cost-Sharing Limitations.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--A group health plan or a health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage shall not apply, and shall ensure that no provider 
        applies cost-sharing to an enrollee for treatment or services 
        provided by a health care provider in excess of the normal 
        cost-sharing applied for in-network care (including any balance 
        bill issued by the health care provider involved), if such 
        enrollee, or health care provider referring such enrollee, 
        demonstrates (based on the electronic information described in 
        subsection (a)(1)(A)(i) or a copy of the online provider 
        directory described in subsection (a)(1)(A)(ii) on the date the 
        enrollee attempted to obtain the provider's network status) 
        that the enrollee relied on the information described in 
        subsection (a)(1), if the provider's network status or 
        directory information on such directory was incorrect at the 
        time the treatment or services involved was provided.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Refunds to enrollees.--If a health care 
        provider submits a bill to an enrollee in violation of 
        paragraph (1), and the enrollee pays such bill, the provider 
        shall reimburse the enrollee for the full amount paid by the 
        enrollee in excess of the in-network cost-sharing amount for 
        the treatment or services involved, plus interest, at an 
        interest rate determined by the Secretary.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Provider Business Processes.--A health care provider 
shall have in place business processes to ensure the timely provision 
of provider directory information to a group health plan or a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
to support compliance by such plans or issuers with subsection (a)(1). 
Such providers shall submit provider directory information to a plan or 
issuers, at a minimum--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) when the provider begins a network agreement 
        with a plan or with an issuer with respect to certain 
        coverage;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) when the provider terminates a network 
        agreement with a plan or with an issuer with respect to certain 
        coverage;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) when there are material changes to the 
        content of provider directory information described in 
        subsection (a)(1); and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) every 90 days throughout the duration of the 
        network agreement with a plan or issuer.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Enforcement.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a 
        health care provider that violates a requirement under 
        subsection (c) or takes actions that prevent a group health 
        plan or health insurance issuer from complying with subsection 
        (a)(1) or (b) shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of 
        not more than $10,000 for each act constituting such 
        violation.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Safe harbor.--The Secretary may waive the 
        penalty described under paragraph (1) with respect to a health 
        care provider that unknowingly violates subsection (b)(1) with 
        respect to an enrollee if such provider rescinds the bill 
        involved and, if applicable, reimburses the enrollee within 30 
        days of the date on which the provider billed the enrollee in 
        violation of such subsection.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A 
        of the Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) 
        and the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, 
        shall apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in 
        the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
        proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
        Act.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall 
prohibit a provider from requiring in the terms of a contract, or 
contract termination, with a group health plan or health insurance 
issuer--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) that the plan or issuer remove, at the time 
        of termination of such contract, the provider from a directory 
        of the plan or issuer described in subsection (a)(1); 
        or</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) that the plan or issuer bear financial 
        responsibility, including under subsection (b), for providing 
        inaccurate network status information to an enrollee.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`provider directory information' includes the names, addresses, 
specialty, and telephone numbers of individual health care providers, 
and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each medical group, 
clinic, or facility contracted to participate in any of the networks of 
the group health plan or health insurance coverage involved.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to preempt any provision of State law relating to health 
care provider directories or network adequacy.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 305. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) Amendment.--Part P of title III of the Public 
        Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.) is amended by 
        adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 399V-7. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall require--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) health care facilities, or in the case of 
        practitioners providing services outside of such a facility, 
        practitioners, to provide to patients a list of services 
        rendered during the visit to such facility or practitioner, 
        and, in the case of a facility, the name of the provider for 
        each such service, upon discharge or by postal or electronic 
        communication as soon as practicable and not later than 5 
        calendar days after discharge; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) health care facilities and practitioners to 
        send all adjudicated bills to the patient as soon as 
        practicable, but not later than 45 calendar days after 
        discharge.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Payment After Billing.--No patient may be required 
to pay a bill for health care services any earlier than 30 calendar 
days after receipt of a bill for such services.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Effect of Violation.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Notification and refund requirements.--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Provider lists.--If a facility or 
                practitioner fails to provide a patient a list as 
                required under subsection (a)(1), such facility or 
                practitioner shall report such failure to the 
                Secretary.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Billing.--If a facility or 
                practitioner bills a patient after the 45-calendar-day 
                period described in subsection (a)(2), such facility or 
                practitioner shall--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) report such bill to the 
                        Secretary; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) refund the patient for the 
                        full amount paid in response to such bill with 
                        interest, at a rate determined by the 
                        Secretary.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Civil monetary penalties.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may 
                impose civil monetary penalties of up to $10,000 a day 
                on any facility or practitioner that--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) fails to provide a list 
                        required under subsection (a)(1) more than 10 
                        times, beginning on the date of such tenth 
                        failure;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) submits more than 10 bills 
                        outside of the period described in subsection 
                        (a)(2), beginning on the date on which such 
                        facility or practitioner sends the tenth such 
                        bill;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) fails to report to the 
                        Secretary any failure to provide lists as 
                        required under paragraph (1)(A), beginning on 
                        the date that is 45 calendar days after 
                        discharge; or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) fails to send any bill as 
                        required under subsection (a)(2), beginning on 
                        the date that is 45 calendar days after the 
                        date of discharge or visit, as 
                        applicable.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Procedure.--The provisions of 
                section 1128A of the Social Security Act, other than 
                subsections (a) and (b) and the first sentence of 
                subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall apply to civil 
                money penalties under this subsection in the same 
                manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
                proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
                Act.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Safe harbor.--The Secretary may exempt a 
        practitioner or facility from the penalties under paragraph 
        (2)(A) or extend the period of time specified under subsection 
        (a)(2) for compliance with such subsection if a practitioner or 
        facility--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) makes a good faith attempt to send a 
                bill within 30 days but is unable to do so because of 
                an incorrect address; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) experiences extenuating 
                circumstances (as defined by the Secretary), such as a 
                hurricane or cyberattack, that may reasonably delay 
                delivery of a timely bill.''.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the 
        date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate 
        final regulations to define the term ``extenuating 
        circumstance'' for purposes of section 399V-7(c)(3)(B) of the 
        Public Health Service Act, as added by paragraph (1).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Group Health Plan and Health Insurance Issuer 
Requirements.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11), as amended by section 304, is further 
amended by adding to the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729D. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall 
have in place business practices with respect to in-network facilities 
and practitioners to ensure that claims are adjudicated in order to 
facilitate facility and practitioner compliance with the requirements 
under section 399V-7(a).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Clarification.--Nothing in subsection (a) prohibits 
a provider and a group health plan or health insurance issuer from 
establishing in a contract the timeline for submission by either party 
to the other party of billing information, adjudication, sending of 
remittance information, or any other coordination required between the 
provider and the plan or issuer necessary for meeting the deadline 
described in section 399V-7(a)(2).''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections 
(a) and (b) shall take effect 6 months after the date of enactment of 
this Act.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 306. HEALTH PLAN OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGER 
              SERVICES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by section 305, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729E. HEALTH PLAN OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT 
              MANAGER SERVICES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or health insurance 
issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage or an 
entity or subsidiary providing pharmacy benefits management services 
shall not enter into a contract with a drug manufacturer, distributor, 
wholesaler, subcontractor, rebate aggregator, or any associated third 
party that limits the disclosure of information to plan sponsors in 
such a manner that prevents the plan or coverage, or an entity or 
subsidiary providing pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of 
a plan or coverage from making the reports described in subsection 
(b).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Reports to Group Plan Sponsors.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Beginning with the first plan 
        year that begins after the date of enactment of the Lower 
        Health Care Costs Act, not less frequently than once per plan 
        quarter, a health insurance issuer offering group health 
        insurance coverage or an entity providing pharmacy benefits 
        management services on behalf of a group health plan shall 
        submit to the plan sponsor (as defined in section 3(16)(B) of 
        the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) of such 
        group health plan or health insurance coverage a report in 
        accordance with this subsection and make such report available 
        to the plan sponsor in a machine-readable format. Each such 
        report shall include, with respect to the applicable group 
        health plan or health insurance coverage--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) information collected from drug 
                manufacturers by such issuer or entity on the total 
                amount of copayment assistance dollars paid, or 
                copayment cards applied, that were funded by the drug 
                manufacturer with respect to the enrollees in such plan 
                or coverage;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) a list of each covered drug 
                dispensed during the reporting period, including, with 
                respect to each such drug during the reporting period--
                </DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) the brand name, chemical 
                        entity, and National Drug Code;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) the number of enrollees for 
                        whom the drug was filled during the plan year, 
                        the total number of prescription fills for the 
                        drug (including original prescriptions and 
                        refills), and the total number of dosage units 
                        of the drug dispensed across the plan year, 
                        including whether the dispensing channel was by 
                        retail, mail order, or specialty 
                        pharmacy;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) the wholesale acquisition 
                        cost, listed as cost per days supply and cost 
                        per pill, or in the case of a drug in another 
                        form, per dose;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) the total out-of-pocket 
                        spending by enrollees on such drug, including 
                        enrollee spending through copayments, 
                        coinsurance, and deductibles; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) for any drug for which gross 
                        spending of the group health plan or health 
                        insurance coverage exceeded $10,000 during the 
                        reporting period--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) a list of all other 
                                available drugs in the same therapeutic 
                                category or class, including brand name 
                                drugs and biological products and 
                                generic drugs or biosimilar biological 
                                products that are in the same 
                                therapeutic category or class; 
                                and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the rationale for 
                                preferred formulary placement of a 
                                particular drug or drugs in that 
                                therapeutic category or 
                                class;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) a list of each therapeutic category 
                or class of drugs that were dispensed under the health 
                plan or health insurance coverage during the reporting 
                period, and, with respect to each such therapeutic 
                category or class of drugs, during the reporting 
                period--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) total gross spending by the 
                        plan, before manufacturer rebates, fees, or 
                        other manufacturer remuneration;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) the number of enrollees who 
                        filled a prescription for a drug in that 
                        category or class;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) if applicable to that 
                        category or class, a description of the 
                        formulary tiers and utilization mechanisms 
                        (such as prior authorization or step therapy) 
                        employed for drugs in that category or 
                        class;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) the total out-of-pocket 
                        spending by enrollees, including enrollee 
                        spending through copayments, coinsurance, and 
                        deductibles; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) for each therapeutic 
                        category or class under which three or more 
                        drugs are marketed and available--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) the amount received, 
                                or expected to be received, from drug 
                                manufacturers in rebates, fees, 
                                alternative discounts, or other 
                                remuneration--</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(aa) to be paid 
                                        by drug manufacturers for 
                                        claims incurred during the 
                                        reporting period; or</DELETED>
                                        <DELETED>    ``(bb) that is 
                                        related to utilization of 
                                        drugs, in such therapeutic 
                                        category or class;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the total net 
                                spending by the health plan or health 
                                insurance coverage on that category or 
                                class of drugs; and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) the net price per 
                                dosage unit or course of treatment 
                                incurred by the health plan or health 
                                insurance coverage and its enrollees, 
                                after manufacturer rebates, fees, and 
                                other remuneration for drugs dispensed 
                                within such therapeutic category or 
                                class during the reporting 
                                period;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) total gross spending on prescription 
                drugs by the plan or coverage during the reporting 
                period, before rebates and other manufacturer fees or 
                remuneration;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(E) total amount received, or expected 
                to be received, by the health plan or health insurance 
                coverage in drug manufacturer rebates, fees, 
                alternative discounts, and all other remuneration 
                received from the manufacturer or any third party 
                related to utilization of drug or drug spending under 
                that health plan or health insurance coverage during 
                the reporting period;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(F) the total net spending on 
                prescription drugs by the health plan or health 
                insurance coverage during the reporting period; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(G) amounts paid directly or indirectly 
                in rebates, fees, or any other type of remuneration to 
                brokers, consultants, advisors, or any other individual 
                or firm who referred the group health plan's or health 
                insurance issuer's business to the pharmacy benefit 
                manager.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Privacy requirements.--Health insurance 
        issuers offering group health insurance coverage and entities 
        providing pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a 
        group health plan shall provide information under paragraph (1) 
        in a manner consistent with the privacy, security, and breach 
        notification regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of 
        the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
        (or successor regulations), and shall restrict the use and 
        disclosure of such information according to such privacy 
        regulations.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Disclosure and redisclosure.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Limitation to business associates.--
                A group health plan receiving a report under paragraph 
                (1) may disclose such information only to business 
                associates of such plan as defined in section 160.103 
                of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor 
                regulations).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Clarification regarding public 
                disclosure of information.--Nothing in this section 
                prevents a health insurance issuer offering group 
                health insurance coverage or an entity providing 
                pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a 
                group health plan from placing reasonable restrictions 
                on the public disclosure of the information contained 
                in a report described in paragraph (1).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Limitations on Spread Pricing.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Prescription drug transactions with 
        pharmacies independent of the issuer or pharmacy benefits 
        manager.--If the pharmacy that dispenses a prescription drug to 
        an enrollee in a group health plan or group or individual 
        health insurance coverage is not wholly or partially owned by 
        such plan, such issuer, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit 
        management services under such plan or coverage, such plan, 
        issuer, or entity shall not charge the plan, issuer, or 
        enrollee a price for such prescription drug that exceeds the 
        price paid to the pharmacy, excluding penalties paid by 
        pharmacies to such plan, issuer, or entity.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Intra-company prescription drug 
        transactions.--If the mail order, specialty, or retail pharmacy 
        that dispenses a prescription drug to an enrollee in a group 
        health plan or health insurance coverage is wholly or partially 
        owned by such health insurance issuer or an entity providing 
        pharmacy benefit management services under a group health plan 
        or group or individual health insurance coverage, the price 
        charged for such drug by such pharmacy to such group health 
        plan or health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
        health insurance coverage may not exceed the lesser of--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the wholesale acquisition cost of 
                the drug paid by the pharmacy, plus clearly documented 
                dispensing costs, including pharmacy profit; 
                or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) the median price charged to the 
                group health plan or health insurance issuer when the 
                same drug is dispensed to enrollees in the plan or 
                coverage by other similarly situated pharmacies not 
                wholly or partially owned by the health insurance 
                issuer or entity providing pharmacy benefits management 
                services, as described in paragraph (1).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Supplementary reporting for intra-company 
        prescription drug transactions.--A health insurance issuer of 
        group health insurance coverage or an entity providing pharmacy 
        benefits management services under a group health plan or group 
        health insurance coverage that conducts transactions with a 
        wholly or partially owned pharmacy, as described in paragraph 
        (2), shall submit, together with the report under subsection 
        (b), a supplementary quarterly report to the plan sponsor that 
        includes--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) an explanation of any benefit design 
                parameters that encourage enrollees in the plan or 
                coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order, 
                specialty, or retail pharmacies that are wholly or 
                partially owned by that issuer or entity;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) the percentage of total 
                prescriptions charged to the plan, coverage, or 
                enrollees in the plan or coverage, that were dispensed 
                by mail order, specialty, or retail pharmacies that are 
                wholly or partially owned by the issuer or entity 
                providing pharmacy benefits management services; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) a list of all drugs dispensed by 
                such wholly or partially owned pharmacy and charged to 
                the plan or coverage, or enrollees of the plan or 
                coverage, during the applicable quarter, and, with 
                respect to each drug--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) the amount charged per 
                        dosage unit or course of treatment with respect 
                        to enrollees in the plan or coverage, including 
                        amounts charged to the plan or coverage and 
                        amounts charged to the enrollee;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) the median amount charged 
                        to the plan or coverage, per dosage unit or 
                        course of treatment, and including amounts paid 
                        by the enrollee, when the same drug is 
                        dispensed by other pharmacies that are not 
                        wholly or partially owned by the issuer or 
                        entity and that are included in the pharmacy 
                        network of that plan or coverage;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) the interquartile range of 
                        the costs, per dosage unit or course of 
                        treatment, and including amounts paid by the 
                        enrollee, when the same drug is dispensed by 
                        other pharmacies that are not wholly or 
                        partially owned by the issuer or entity and 
                        that are included in the pharmacy network of 
                        that plan or coverage; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) the lowest cost per dosage 
                        unit or course of treatment, for such drug, 
                        including amounts charged to the plan or issuer 
                        and enrollee, that is available from any 
                        pharmacy included in the network of the plan or 
                        coverage.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Full Rebate Pass-Through to Plan.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--A pharmacy benefits manager, a 
        third-party administrator of a group health plan, a health 
        insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage, or 
        an entity providing pharmacy benefits management services under 
        such health plan or health insurance coverage shall remit 100 
        percent of rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and all other 
        remuneration received from a pharmaceutical manufacturer, 
        distributor or any other third party, that are related to 
        utilization of drugs under such health plan or health insurance 
        coverage, to the group health plan.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Form and manner of remittance.--Such 
        rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and other remuneration 
        shall be--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) remitted to the group health plan in 
                a timely fashion after the period for which such 
                rebates, fees, or other remuneration is calculated, and 
                in no case later than 90 days after the end of such 
                period;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) fully disclosed and enumerated to 
                the group health plan sponsor, as described in (b)(1); 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) available for audit by the plan 
                sponsor, or a third-party designated by a plan sponsor 
                no less than once per plan year.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Enforcement.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Failure to provide timely information.--A 
        health insurance issuer or an entity providing pharmacy benefit 
        management services that violates subsection (a), fails to 
        provide information required under subsection (b), engages in 
        spread pricing as defined in subsection (c), or fails to comply 
        with the requirements of subsection (d), or a drug manufacturer 
        that fails to provide information under subsection (b)(1)(A), 
        in a timely manner shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty 
        in the amount of $10,000 for each day during which such 
        violation continues or such information is not disclosed or 
        reported.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) False information.--A health insurance 
        issuer, entity providing pharmacy benefit management services, 
        or drug manufacturer that knowingly provides false information 
        under this section shall be subject to a civil money penalty in 
        an amount not to exceed $100,000 for each item of false 
        information. Such civil money penalty shall be in addition to 
        other penalties as may be prescribed by law.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A 
        of the Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) 
        and the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section 
        shall apply to civil monetary penalties under this subsection 
        in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
        proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
        Act.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Definitions.--In this section--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) the term `similarly situated pharmacy' 
        means, with respect to a particular pharmacy, another pharmacy 
        that is approximately the same size (as measured by the number 
        of prescription drugs dispensed), and that serves patients in 
        the same geographical area, whether through physical locations 
        or mail order; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) the term `wholesale acquisition cost' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 1847A(c)(6)(B) of the 
        Social Security Act.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 307. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE STUDY ON PROFIT- 
              AND REVENUE-SHARING IN HEALTH CARE.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall conduct a study to--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) describe what is known about profit- and 
        revenue-sharing relationships in the commercial health care 
        markets, including those relationships that--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) involve one or more--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) physician groups that practice 
                        within a hospital included in the profit- or 
                        revenue-sharing relationship, or refer patients 
                        to such hospital;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) laboratory, radiology, or 
                        pharmacy services that are delivered to 
                        privately insured patients of such 
                        hospital;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (iii) surgical services;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (iv) hospitals or group purchasing 
                        organizations; or</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (v) rehabilitation or physical 
                        therapy facilities or services; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) include revenue- or profit-sharing 
                whether through a joint venture, management or 
                professional services agreement, or other form of gain-
                sharing contract;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) describe Federal oversight of such 
        relationships, including authorities of the Department of 
        Health and Human Services and the Federal Trade Commission to 
        review such relationships and their potential to increase costs 
        for patients, and identify limitations in such oversight; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) as appropriate, make recommendations to 
        improve Federal oversight of such relationships.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall prepare and submit a report on the study conducted under 
subsection (a) to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and Labor and the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 308. DISCLOSURE OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT COMPENSATION FOR 
              BROKERS AND CONSULTANTS TO EMPLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTH 
              PLANS AND ENROLLEES IN PLANS ON THE INDIVIDUAL 
              MARKET.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Group Health Plans.--Section 408(b)(2) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)) is 
amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) by striking ``(2) Contracting or making'' and 
        inserting ``(2)(A) Contracting or making''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(B)(i) No contract or arrangement for services 
        between a covered plan and a covered service provider, and no 
        extension or renewal of such a contract or arrangement, is 
        reasonable within the meaning of this paragraph unless the 
        requirements of this clause are met.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(ii)(I) For purposes of this 
        subparagraph:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(aa) The term `covered plan' means a 
                group health plan as defined section 733(a).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(bb) The term `covered service provider' 
                means a service provider that enters into a contract or 
                arrangement with the covered plan and reasonably 
                expects $1,000 (or such amount as the Secretary may 
                establish in regulations to account for inflation since 
                the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
                Act, as appropriate) or more in compensation, direct or 
                indirect, to be received in connection with providing 
                one or more of the following services, pursuant to the 
                contract or arrangement, regardless of whether such 
                services will be performed, or such compensation 
                received, by the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(AA) Brokerage services, for 
                        which the covered service provider, an 
                        affiliate, or a subcontractor reasonably 
                        expects to receive indirect compensation or 
                        direct compensation described in item (dd), 
                        provided to a covered plan with respect to 
                        selection of insurance products (including 
                        vision and dental), recordkeeping services, 
                        medical management vendor, benefits 
                        administration (including vision and dental), 
                        stop-loss insurance, pharmacy benefit 
                        management services, wellness services, 
                        transparency tools and vendors, group 
                        purchasing organization preferred vendor 
                        panels, disease management vendors and 
                        products, compliance services, employee 
                        assistance programs, or third-party 
                        administration services.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(BB) Consulting, for which the 
                        covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                        subcontractor reasonably expects to receive 
                        indirect compensation or direct compensation 
                        described in item (dd), related to the 
                        development or implementation of plan design, 
                        insurance or insurance product selection 
                        (including vision and dental), recordkeeping, 
                        medical management, benefits administration 
                        selection (including vision and dental), stop-
                        loss insurance, pharmacy benefit management 
                        services, wellness design and management 
                        services, transparency tools, group purchasing 
                        organization agreements and services, 
                        participation in and services from preferred 
                        vendor panels, disease management, compliance 
                        services, employee assistance programs, or 
                        third-party administration services.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(cc) The term `affiliate', with respect 
                to a covered service provider, means an entity that 
                directly or indirectly (through one or more 
                intermediaries) controls, is controlled by, or is under 
                common control with, such provider, or is an officer, 
                director, or employee of, or partner in, such 
                provider.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(dd)(AA) The term `compensation' means 
                anything of monetary value, but does not include non-
                monetary compensation valued at $250 (or such amount as 
                the Secretary may establish in regulations to account 
                for inflation since the date of enactment of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act, as appropriate) or less, in the 
                aggregate, during the term of the contract or 
                arrangement.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(BB) The term `direct compensation' 
                means compensation received directly from a covered 
                plan.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(CC) The term `indirect compensation' 
                means compensation received from any source other than 
                the covered plan, the plan sponsor, the covered service 
                provider, or an affiliate. Compensation received from a 
                subcontractor is indirect compensation, unless it is 
                received in connection with services performed under a 
                contract or arrangement with a subcontractor.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ee) The term `responsible plan 
                fiduciary' means a fiduciary with authority to cause 
                the covered plan to enter into, or extend or renew, the 
                contract or arrangement.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ff) The term `subcontractor' means any 
                person or entity (or an affiliate of such person or 
                entity) that is not an affiliate of the covered service 
                provider and that, pursuant to a contract or 
                arrangement with the covered service provider or an 
                affiliate, reasonably expects to receive $1,000 (or 
                such amount as the Secretary may establish in 
                regulations to account for inflation since the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, as 
                appropriate) or more in compensation for performing one 
                or more services described in item (bb) under a 
                contract or arrangement with the covered 
                plan.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(II) For purposes of this subparagraph, a 
        description of compensation or cost may be expressed as a 
        monetary amount, formula, or a per capita charge for each 
        enrollee or, if the compensation or cost cannot reasonably be 
        expressed in such terms, by any other reasonable method, 
        including a disclosure that additional compensation may be 
        earned but may not be calculated at the time of contract if 
        such a disclosure includes a description of the circumstances 
        under which the additional compensation may be earned and a 
        reasonable and good faith estimate if the covered service 
        provider cannot otherwise readily describe compensation or cost 
        and explains the methodology and assumptions used to prepare 
        such estimate. Any such description shall contain sufficient 
        information to permit evaluation of the reasonableness of the 
        compensation or cost.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(III) No person or entity is a `covered service 
        provider' within the meaning of subclause (I)(bb) solely on the 
        basis of providing services as an affiliate or a subcontractor 
        that is performing one or more of the services described in 
        subitem (AA) or (BB) of such subclause under the contract or 
        arrangement with the covered plan.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(iii) A covered service provider shall disclose 
        to a responsible plan fiduciary, in writing, the 
        following:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(I) A description of the services to be 
                provided to the covered plan pursuant to the contract 
                or arrangement.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(II) If applicable, a statement that the 
                covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                subcontractor will provide, or reasonably expects to 
                provide, services pursuant to the contract or 
                arrangement directly to the covered plan as a fiduciary 
                (within the meaning of section 3(21)).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(III) A description of all direct 
                compensation, either in the aggregate or by service, 
                that the covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                subcontractor reasonably expects to receive in 
                connection with the services described in subclause 
                (I).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(IV)(aa) A description of all indirect 
                compensation that the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor reasonably expects to 
                receive in connection with the services described in 
                subclause (I)--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(AA) including compensation from 
                        a vendor to a brokerage firm based on a 
                        structure of incentives not solely related to 
                        the contract with the covered plan; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(BB) not including compensation 
                        received by an employee from an employer on 
                        account of work performed by the 
                        employee.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(bb) A description of the arrangement 
                between the payer and the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor, as applicable, pursuant 
                to which such indirect compensation is paid.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(cc) Identification of the services for 
                which the indirect compensation will be received, if 
                applicable.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(dd) Identification of the payer of the 
                indirect compensation.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(V) A description of any compensation 
                that will be paid among the covered service provider, 
                an affiliate, or a subcontractor, in connection with 
                the services described in subclause (I) if such 
                compensation is set on a transaction basis (such as 
                commissions, finder's fees, or other similar incentive 
                compensation based on business placed or retained), 
                including identification of the services for which such 
                compensation will be paid and identification of the 
                payers and recipients of such compensation (including 
                the status of a payer or recipient as an affiliate or a 
                subcontractor), regardless of whether such compensation 
                also is disclosed pursuant to subclause (III) or 
                (IV).</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(VI) A description of any compensation 
                that the covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                subcontractor reasonably expects to receive in 
                connection with termination of the contract or 
                arrangement, and how any prepaid amounts will be 
                calculated and refunded upon such 
                termination.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(iv) A covered service provider shall disclose 
        to a responsible plan fiduciary, in writing a description of 
        the manner in which the compensation described in clause (iii), 
        as applicable, will be received.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(v)(I) A covered service provider shall disclose 
        the information required under clauses (iii) and (iv) to the 
        responsible plan fiduciary not later than the date that is 
        reasonably in advance of the date on which the contract or 
        arrangement is entered into, and extended or renewed.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(II) A covered service provider shall disclose 
        any change to the information required under clauses (iii) and 
        (iv) as soon as practicable, but not later than 60 days from 
        the date on which the covered service provider is informed of 
        such change, unless such disclosure is precluded due to 
        extraordinary circumstances beyond the covered service 
        provider's control, in which case the information shall be 
        disclosed as soon as practicable.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(vi)(I) Upon the written request of the 
        responsible plan fiduciary or covered plan administrator, a 
        covered service provider shall furnish any other information 
        relating to the compensation received in connection with the 
        contract or arrangement that is required for the covered plan 
        to comply with the reporting and disclosure requirements under 
        this Act.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(II) The covered service provider shall disclose 
        the information required under clause (iii)(I) reasonably in 
        advance of the date upon which such responsible plan fiduciary 
        or covered plan administrator states that it is required to 
        comply with the applicable reporting or disclosure requirement, 
        unless such disclosure is precluded due to extraordinary 
        circumstances beyond the covered service provider's control, in 
        which case the information shall be disclosed as soon as 
        practicable.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(vii) No contract or arrangement will fail to be 
        reasonable under this subparagraph solely because the covered 
        service provider, acting in good faith and with reasonable 
        diligence, makes an error or omission in disclosing the 
        information required pursuant to clause (iii) (or a change to 
        such information disclosed pursuant to clause (v)(II)) or 
        clause (vi), provided that the covered service provider 
        discloses the correct information to the responsible plan 
        fiduciary as soon as practicable, but not later than 30 days 
        from the date on which the covered service provider knows of 
        such error or omission.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(viii)(I) Pursuant to subsection (a), 
        subparagraphs (C) and (D) of section 406(a)(1) shall not apply 
        to a responsible plan fiduciary, notwithstanding any failure by 
        a covered service provider to disclose information required 
        under clause (iii), if the following conditions are 
        met:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(aa) The responsible plan fiduciary did 
                not know that the covered service provider failed or 
                would fail to make required disclosures and reasonably 
                believed that the covered service provider disclosed 
                the information required to be disclosed.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(bb) The responsible plan fiduciary, 
                upon discovering that the covered service provider 
                failed to disclose the required information, requests 
                in writing that the covered service provider furnish 
                such information.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(cc) If the covered service provider 
                fails to comply with a written request described in 
                subclause (II) within 90 days of the request, the 
                responsible plan fiduciary notifies the Secretary of 
                the covered service provider's failure, in accordance 
                with subclauses (II) and (III).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(II) A notice described in subclause (I)(cc) 
        shall contain--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(aa) the name of the covered 
                plan;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(bb) the plan number used for the annual 
                report on the covered plan;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(cc) the plan sponsor's name, address, 
                and employer identification number;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(dd) the name, address, and telephone 
                number of the responsible plan fiduciary;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ee) the name, address, phone number, 
                and, if known, employer identification number of the 
                covered service provider;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ff) a description of the services 
                provided to the covered plan;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(gg) a description of the information 
                that the covered service provider failed to 
                disclose;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(hh) the date on which such information 
                was requested in writing from the covered service 
                provider; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ii) a statement as to whether the 
                covered service provider continues to provide services 
                to the plan.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(III) A notice described in subclause (I)(cc) 
        shall be filed with the Department not later than 30 days 
        following the earlier of--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(aa) the covered service provider's 
                refusal to furnish the information requested by the 
                written request described in subclause (I)(bb); 
                or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(bb) 90 days after the written request 
                referred to in subclause (I)(cc) is made.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(IV) If the covered service provider fails to 
        comply with the written request under subclause (I)(bb) within 
        90 days of such request, the responsible plan fiduciary shall 
        determine whether to terminate or continue the contract or 
        arrangement under section 404. If the requested information 
        relates to future services and is not disclosed promptly after 
        the end of the 90-day period, the responsible plan fiduciary 
        shall terminate the contract or arrangement as expeditiously as 
        possible, consistent with such duty of prudence.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(ix) Nothing in this subparagraph shall be 
        construed to supersede any provision of State law that governs 
        disclosures by parties that provide the services described in 
        this section, except to the extent that such law prevents the 
        application of a requirement of this section.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Applicability of Existing Regulations.--Nothing in the 
amendments made by subsection (a) shall be construed to affect the 
applicability of section 2550.408b-2 of title 29, Code of Federal 
Regulations (or any successor regulations), with respect to any 
applicable entity other than a covered plan or a covered service 
provider (as defined in section 408(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by subsection 
(a)).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Individual Market Coverage.--Subpart 1 of part B of 
title XVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-41 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2746. DISCLOSURE TO ENROLLEES OF INDIVIDUAL MARKET 
              COVERAGE.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--A health insurance issuer offering 
individual health insurance coverage shall make disclosures to 
enrollees in such coverage, as described in subsection (b), and reports 
to the Secretary, as described in subsection (c), regarding direct or 
indirect compensation provided to an agent or broker associated with 
enrolling individuals in such coverage.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Disclosure.--A health insurance issuer described in 
subsection (a) shall disclose to an enrollee the amount of direct or 
indirect compensation provided to an agent or broker for services 
provided by such agent or broker associated with plan selection and 
enrollment. Such disclosure shall be--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) made prior to the individual finalizing plan 
        selection; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) included on any documentation confirming the 
        individual's enrollment.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Reporting.--A health insurance issuer described in 
subsection (a) shall report to the Secretary any direct or indirect 
compensation provided to an agent or broker associated with enrolling 
individuals in such coverage.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the Secretary shall 
finalize, through notice-and-comment rulemaking, the form and manner in 
which issuers described in subsection (a) are required to make the 
disclosures described in subsection (b) and the reports described in 
subsection (c).''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (d) Transition Rule.--No contract executed prior to the 
effective date described in subsection (e) by a group health plan 
subject to the requirements of section 408(b)(2)(B) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as amended by subsection (a)) 
or by a health insurance issuer subject to the requirements of section 
2746 of the Public Health Service Act (as added by subsection (c)) 
shall be subject to the requirements of such section 408(b)(2)(B) or 
such section 2746, as applicable.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections 
(a) and (c) shall take effect 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 309. ENSURING ENROLLEE ACCESS TO COST-SHARING 
              INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended 
by section 306, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2729F. PROVISION OF COST-SHARING INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Provider Disclosures.--A provider that is in-network 
with respect to a group health plan or a health insurance issuer 
offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall provide to 
an enrollee in the plan or coverage who submits a request for the 
information described in paragraph (1) or (2), together with accurate 
and complete information about the enrollee's coverage under the 
applicable plan or coverage--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) as soon as practicable and not later than 2 
        business days after the enrollee requests such information, a 
        good faith estimate of the expected enrollee cost-sharing for 
        the provision of a particular health care service (including 
        any service that is reasonably expected to be provided in 
        conjunction with such specific service); and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) as soon as practicable and not later than 2 
        business days after an enrollee requests such information, the 
        contact information for any ancillary providers for a scheduled 
        health care service.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Insurer Disclosures.--A group health plan or a 
health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
coverage shall provide an enrollee in the plan or coverage with a good 
faith estimate of the enrollee's cost-sharing (including deductibles, 
copayments, and coinsurance) for which the enrollee would be 
responsible for paying with respect to a specific health care service 
(including any service that is reasonably expected to be provided in 
conjunction with such specific service), as soon as practicable and not 
later than 2 business days after receiving a request for such 
information by an enrollee.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Enforcement.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a 
        health care provider that violates a requirement under 
        subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of 
        not more than $10,000 for each act constituting such 
        violation.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A 
        of the Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) 
        and the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, 
        shall apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in 
        the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
        proceeding under section 1128A of the Social Security 
        Act.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2729G of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to 
plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2021.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 310. STRENGTHENING PARITY IN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE 
              USE DISORDER BENEFITS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 2726 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300gg-26) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the 
        following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(8) Compliance requirements.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Nonquantitative treatment limitation 
                (nqtl) requirements.--In the case of a group health 
                plan or a health insurance issuer offering group or 
                individual health insurance coverage that provides both 
                medical and surgical benefits and mental health or 
                substance use disorder benefits, the plan or coverage 
                shall perform comparative analyses about the design and 
                application of nonquantitative treatment limitations 
                (referred to in this paragraph as the `NQTL') in 
                accordance with the following process, and make 
                available to the Secretary upon request within 60 days 
                beginning January 1, 2020, and within 30 days beginning 
                January 1, 2021, the following information:</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) The specific plan or 
                        coverage language regarding the NQTL, that 
                        applies to such plan or coverage, and a 
                        description of all mental health or substance 
                        use disorder and medical/surgical services to 
                        which it applies in each respective benefits 
                        classification.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) The factors used to 
                        determine that an NQTL will apply to mental 
                        health or substance use disorder benefits and 
                        medical/surgical benefits.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) The evidentiary standard 
                        (both identified and deidentified) for the 
                        factors identified in clause (ii) and any other 
                        evidence relied upon to design and apply the 
                        NQTL to mental health or substance use disorder 
                        benefits and medical/surgical 
                        benefits.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) The comparative analyses 
                        demonstrating that the processes and strategies 
                        used to design the NQTL, as written and in 
                        operation, and the as written processes and 
                        strategies used to apply the NQTL for mental 
                        health or substance use disorder benefits are 
                        comparable to, and are applied no more 
                        stringently than, the processes and strategies 
                        used to design the NQTL, as written and in 
                        operation, and the as written processes and 
                        strategies used to apply the NQTL to medical/
                        surgical benefits.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) A disclosure of the specific 
                        findings and conclusions reached by the plan or 
                        coverage that the results of the analyses 
                        described in this subparagraph indicate that 
                        the plan or coverage is in compliance with this 
                        section.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Secretary request process.--
                </DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) Submission upon complaint.--
                        The Secretary shall request that a group health 
                        plan or a health insurance issuer offering 
                        group or individual health insurance coverage 
                        submit the comparative analyses described in 
                        subparagraph (A) if the Secretary has received 
                        any complaints from plan participants or 
                        participating providers about such a plan or 
                        coverage that involve mental health or 
                        substance use disorder benefits.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Random submissions.--The 
                        Secretary shall request the comparative 
                        analyses described in subparagraph (A) from no 
                        fewer than 50 plans or coverages selected at 
                        random, annually, and such plans or coverages 
                        shall not--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) be the same plans or 
                                coverages for which the comparative 
                                analyses are requested under clause 
                                (i);</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) be the same plan or 
                                coverage being investigated by the 
                                Department regarding NQTLs or that has 
                                been investigated by the Department 
                                regarding NQTLs within the last 5 
                                years; and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) be the same plan 
                                or coverage that has been selected 
                                under clause (i) or (ii) within the 
                                last 5 years.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) Additional information.--
                        In instances in which the Secretary has 
                        concluded that the plan or coverage has not 
                        submitted sufficient information for the 
                        Secretary to review the comparative analyses 
                        described in subparagraph (A), as requested 
                        under clauses (i) and (ii), the Secretary shall 
                        specify to the plan or coverage the information 
                        the plan or coverage must submit to be 
                        responsive to the request under clauses (i) and 
                        (ii) for the Secretary to review the 
                        comparative analyses described in subparagraph 
                        (A) for compliance with this section.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iv) Required action.--In 
                        instances in which the Secretary has reviewed 
                        the comparative analyses described in 
                        subparagraph (A), as requested under clauses 
                        (i) and (ii), and determined that the plan or 
                        coverage is not in compliance with this 
                        section, the Secretary shall specify to the 
                        plan or coverage the actions the plan or 
                        coverage must take to be in compliance with 
                        this section. Documents or communications 
                        produced in connection with the Secretary's 
                        recommendations to the plan or coverage shall 
                        not be subject to disclosure pursuant to 
                        section 552 of title 5, United States 
                        Code.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(v) Report.--Not later than 1 
                        year after the date of enactment of this 
                        paragraph, and annually thereafter, the 
                        Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
                        Education and Labor of the House of 
                        Representatives and the Committee on Health, 
                        Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a 
                        report that contains--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(I) each of the 
                                comparative analyses requested under 
                                clauses (i) and (ii), except that the 
                                identity of each plan or coverage and 
                                any contracted entity of a plan or 
                                coverage shall be redacted;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(II) the Secretary's 
                                conclusions as to whether each plan or 
                                coverage submitted sufficient 
                                information for the Secretary to review 
                                the comparative analyses requested 
                                under clauses (i) and (ii) for 
                                compliance with this section;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(III) for each plan or 
                                coverage that did submit sufficient 
                                information for the Secretary to review 
                                the comparative analyses requested 
                                under clause (i), the Secretary's 
                                conclusions as to whether and why the 
                                plan or coverage is in compliance with 
                                this section;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(IV) the Secretary's 
                                specifications described in clause 
                                (iii) for each plan or coverage that 
                                the Secretary determined did not submit 
                                sufficient information for the 
                                Secretary to review the comparative 
                                analyses requested under clauses (i) 
                                and (ii) for compliance with this 
                                section; and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    ``(V) the Secretary's 
                                specifications described in clause (iv) 
                                of the actions each plan or coverage 
                                that the Secretary determined is not in 
                                compliance with this section must take 
                                to be in compliance with this section, 
                                including the reason why the Secretary 
                                determined the plan or coverage is not 
                                in compliance.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Compliance program guidance document 
                update process.--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) In general.--The Secretary 
                        shall include select instances of noncompliance 
                        that the Secretary discovers upon reviewing the 
                        comparative analyses requested under clauses 
                        (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (B) in the 
                        compliance program guidance document described 
                        in section 2726(a)(6), as it is updated every 2 
                        years, except that all instances shall be 
                        deidentified and such instances shall not 
                        disclose any protected health information or 
                        individually identifiable 
                        information.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) Guidance and regulations.--
                        Not later than 18 months after the date of 
                        enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary 
                        shall finalize any draft or interim guidance 
                        and regulations relating to mental health 
                        parity under this section.</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) State.--Any instances of 
                        noncompliance the Secretary discovers upon 
                        reviewing the comparative analyses requested 
                        under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (B) 
                        shall be shared with a State for coverage 
                        offered by a health insurance issuer in the 
                        group market, in accordance with section 
                        2726(a)(6)(B)(iii)(II).''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 311. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) ERISA.--Section 715 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185d) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``(as 
        amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' 
        and inserting ``(including any subsequent amendments to such 
        part)''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in subsection (b)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) by striking ``(as amended by the 
                Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and 
                inserting ``(including any subsequent amendments to 
                such part)''; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) by striking ``(as so 
                amended)''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) IRC.--Section 9815 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``(as 
        amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' 
        and inserting ``(including any subsequent amendments to such 
        part)''; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in subsection (b)--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) by striking ``(as amended by the 
                Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and 
                inserting ``(including any subsequent amendments to 
                such part)''; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) by striking ``(as so 
                amended)''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsections (a) 
and (b) shall take effect as though included in the enactment of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-
148).</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 312. THIRD-PARTY ADMINISTRATORS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Any obligation on a third-party administrator under this 
Act (including the amendments made by this Act) shall not affect any 
other direct or indirect requirement under any other provision of 
Federal law that applies to third-party administrators offering 
services to group health plans.</DELETED>

          <DELETED>TITLE IV--IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 401. IMPROVING AWARENESS OF DISEASE PREVENTION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    The Public Health Service Act is amended by striking 
section 313 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 245) and inserting the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 313. PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ON THE IMPORTANCE OF 
              VACCINATIONS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in 
coordination with other offices and agencies, as appropriate, shall 
award competitive grants to one or more public or private entities to 
carry out a national, evidence-based campaign to increase awareness and 
knowledge of the safety and effectiveness of vaccines for the 
prevention and control of diseases, combat misinformation about 
vaccines, and disseminate scientific and evidence-based vaccine-related 
information, with the goal of increasing rates of vaccination across 
all ages, as applicable, particularly in communities with low rates of 
vaccination, to reduce and eliminate vaccine-preventable 
diseases.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Consultation.--In carrying out the campaign under 
this section, the Secretary shall consult with appropriate public 
health and medical experts, including the National Academy of Medicine 
and medical and public health associations and nonprofit organizations, 
in the development, implementation, and evaluation of the evidence-
based public awareness campaign.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Requirements.--The campaign under this section 
shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) be a national, evidence-based 
        initiative;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) include the development of resources for 
        communities with low rates of vaccination, including culturally 
        and linguistically appropriate resources, as 
        applicable;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) include the dissemination of vaccine 
        information and communication resources to public health 
        departments, health care providers, and health care facilities, 
        including such providers and facilities that provide prenatal 
        and pediatric care;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) be complementary to, and coordinated with, 
        any other Federal, State, or local efforts, as appropriate; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) assess the effectiveness of communication 
        strategies to increase rates of vaccination.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Additional Activities.--The campaign under this 
section may--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) include the use of television, radio, the 
        internet, and other media and telecommunications 
        technologies;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) be focused to address specific needs of 
        communities and populations with low rates of vaccination; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) include the dissemination of scientific and 
        evidence-based vaccine-related information, such as--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) advancements in evidence-based 
                research related to diseases that may be prevented by 
                vaccines and vaccine development;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) information on vaccinations for 
                individuals and communities, including individuals for 
                whom vaccines are not recommended by the Advisory 
                Committee for Immunization Practices, and the effects 
                of low vaccination rates within a community on such 
                individuals;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) information on diseases that may be 
                prevented by vaccines; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) information on vaccine safety and 
                the systems in place to monitor vaccine 
                safety.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) establish benchmarks and metrics to 
        quantitatively measure and evaluate the awareness campaign 
        under this section;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) conduct qualitative assessments regarding 
        the awareness campaign under this section; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) prepare and submit to the Committee on 
        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
        Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives an evaluation of the awareness campaign under 
        this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section and section 
317(k) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2020 through 
2024.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 402. GRANTS TO ADDRESS VACCINE-PREVENTABLE 
              DISEASES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 317(k)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 247b(k)(1)) is amended--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``; and'' and 
        inserting a semicolon;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period 
        and inserting a semicolon; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(E) planning, implementation, and evaluation of 
        activities to address vaccine-preventable diseases, including 
        activities to--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(i) identify communities at high risk of 
                outbreaks related to vaccine-preventable diseases, 
                including through improved data collection and 
                analysis;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ii) pilot innovative approaches to 
                improve vaccination rates in communities and among 
                populations with low rates of vaccination;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(iii) reduce barriers to accessing 
                vaccines and evidence-based information about the 
                health effects of vaccines;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(iv) partner with community 
                organizations and health care providers to develop and 
                deliver evidence-based interventions, including 
                culturally and linguistically appropriate 
                interventions, to increase vaccination rates;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(v) improve delivery of evidence-based 
                vaccine-related information to parents and others; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(vi) improve the ability of State, 
                local, tribal, and territorial public health 
                departments to engage communities at high risk for 
                outbreaks related to vaccine-preventable diseases; 
                and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(F) research related to strategies for improving 
        awareness of scientific and evidence-based vaccine-related 
        information, including for communities with low rates of 
        vaccination, in order to understand barriers to vaccination, 
        improve vaccination rates, and assess the public health 
        outcomes of such strategies.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 403. GUIDE ON EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES FOR PUBLIC HEALTH 
              DEPARTMENT OBESITY PREVENTION PROGRAMS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Development and Dissemination of an Evidence-Based 
Strategies Guide.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred 
to in this section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director 
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, not later than 2 
years after the date of enactment of this Act, shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) develop a guide on evidence-based strategies 
        for State, territorial, and local health departments to use to 
        build and maintain effective obesity prevention and reduction 
        programs, and, in consultation with stakeholders that have 
        expertise in Tribal health, a guide on such evidence-based 
        strategies with respect to Indian Tribes and Tribal 
        organizations for such Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations 
        to use for such purpose, both of which guides shall--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) describe an integrated program 
                structure for implementing interventions proven to be 
                effective in preventing and reducing the incidence of 
                obesity; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) recommend--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (i) optimal resources, including 
                        staffing and infrastructure, for promoting 
                        nutrition and obesity prevention and reduction; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    (ii) strategies for effective 
                        obesity prevention programs for State and local 
                        health departments, Indian Tribes, and Tribal 
                        organizations, including strategies related 
                        to--</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (I) the application of 
                                evidence-based and evidence-informed 
                                practices to prevent and reduce obesity 
                                rates;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (II) the development, 
                                implementation, and evaluation of 
                                obesity prevention and reduction 
                                strategies for specific communities and 
                                populations;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (III) demonstrated 
                                knowledge of obesity prevention 
                                practices that reduce associated 
                                preventable diseases, health 
                                conditions, death, and health care 
                                costs;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (IV) best practices for 
                                the coordination of efforts to prevent 
                                and reduce obesity and related chronic 
                                diseases;</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (V) addressing the 
                                underlying risk factors and social 
                                determinants of health that impact 
                                obesity rates; and</DELETED>
                                <DELETED>    (VI) interdisciplinary 
                                coordination between relevant public 
                                health officials specializing in fields 
                                such as nutrition, physical activity, 
                                epidemiology, communications, and 
                                policy implementation, and 
                                collaboration between public health 
                                officials and community-based 
                                organizations; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) disseminate the guides and current research, 
        evidence-based practices, tools, and educational materials 
        related to obesity prevention, consistent with the guide, to 
        State and local health departments, Indian Tribes, and Tribal 
        organizations.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary, acting through 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
provide technical assistance to State and local health departments, 
Indian Tribes, and Tribal organizations to support such health 
departments in implementing the guide developed under subsection 
(a)(1).</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Indian Tribes; Tribal Organizations.--The terms 
``Indian Tribe'' and ``Tribal organization'' have the meanings given 
the terms ``Indian tribe'' and ``tribal organization'', respectively, 
in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act (25 U.S.C. 5304).</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 404. EXPANDING CAPACITY FOR HEALTH OUTCOMES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by 
inserting after section 330M (42 U.S.C. 254c-19) the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 330N. EXPANDING CAPACITY FOR HEALTH OUTCOMES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' 
        means an entity providing health care services in rural areas, 
        frontier areas, health professional shortage areas, or 
        medically underserved areas, or to medically underserved 
        populations or Native Americans, including Indian tribes or 
        tribal organizations.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Health professional shortage area.--The term 
        `health professional shortage area' means a health professional 
        shortage area designated under section 332.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Indian tribe.--The terms `Indian tribe' and 
        `tribal organization' have the meanings given such terms in 
        section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
        Assistance Act.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Medically underserved population.--The term 
        `medically underserved population' has the meaning given the 
        term in section 330(b)(3).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) Native americans.--The term `Native 
        Americans' has the meaning given such term in section 736 and 
        includes Indian tribes and tribal organizations.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(6) Technology-enabled collaborative learning 
        and capacity building model.--The term `technology-enabled 
        collaborative learning and capacity building model' means a 
        distance health education model that connects specialists with 
        multiple other health care professionals through simultaneous 
        interactive videoconferencing for the purpose of facilitating 
        case-based learning, disseminating best practices, and 
        evaluating outcomes.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Program Established.--The Secretary shall, as 
appropriate, award grants to evaluate, develop, and, as appropriate, 
expand the use of technology-enabled collaborative learning and 
capacity building models, to increase access to health care services, 
such as those to address chronic diseases and conditions, mental 
health, substance use disorders, prenatal and maternal health, 
pediatric care, pain management, palliative care, and other specialty 
care in medically underserved areas and for medically underserved 
populations.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Use of Funds.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--Grants awarded under subsection 
        (b) shall be used for--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the development and acquisition of 
                instructional programming, and the training of health 
                care providers and other professionals that provide or 
                assist in the provision of services through such 
                models;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) information collection and 
                evaluation activities to study the impact of such 
                models on patient outcomes and health care providers, 
                and to identify best practices for the expansion and 
                use of such models; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) other activities consistent with 
                achieving the objectives of the grants awarded under 
                this section, as determined by the Secretary.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Other uses.--In addition to any of the uses 
        under paragraph (1), grants awarded under subsection (b) may be 
        used for--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) equipment to support the use and 
                expansion of technology-enabled collaborative learning 
                and capacity building models, including for hardware 
                and software that enables distance learning, health 
                care provider support, and the secure exchange of 
                electronic health information; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) support for health care providers 
                and other professionals that provide or assist in the 
                provision of services through such models.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Length of Grants.--Grants awarded under subsection 
(b) shall be for a period of up to 5 years.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Application.--An eligible entity that seeks to 
receive a grant under subsection (b) shall submit to the Secretary an 
application, at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require. Such application criteria 
shall include an assessment of the effect of technology-enabled 
collaborative learning and capacity building models on patient outcomes 
and health care providers.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
(either directly through the Department of Health and Human Services or 
by contract) technical assistance to eligible entities, including 
recipients of grants under subsection (b), on the development, use, and 
evaluation of technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity 
building models in order to expand access to health care services 
provided by such entities, including for medically underserved areas 
and to medically underserved populations.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Report by Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after 
the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and 
submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of 
the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives, and post on the internet website of the Department of 
Health and Human Services, a report including, at minimum--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) a description of any new and continuing 
        grants awarded to entities under subsection (b) and the 
        specific purpose and amounts of such grants;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) an overview of--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the evaluations conducted under 
                subsections (b) or (f); and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) technical assistance provided under 
                subsection (f); and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) a description of any significant findings or 
        developments in patient outcomes and health care providers and 
        best practices for eligible entities expanding, using, or 
        evaluating technology-enabled collaborative learning and 
        capacity building models.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as 
may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2020 through 
2024.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 405. PUBLIC HEALTH DATA SYSTEM MODERNIZATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Subtitle C of title XXVIII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh-31 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2822. PUBLIC HEALTH DATA SYSTEM MODERNIZATION 
              GRANTS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) award grants to State, local, Tribal, and 
        territorial public health departments for the expansion and 
        modernization of public health data systems, to assist public 
        health departments in--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) assessing current data 
                infrastructure capabilities and gaps to improve and 
                increase consistency in data collection, storage, 
                analysis, and, as appropriate, to improve dissemination 
                of public health-related information;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) improving secure public health data 
                collection, transmission, exchange, maintenance, and 
                analysis;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) simplifying and supporting reporting 
                by health care providers, as applicable, pursuant to 
                State law, including through the use of health 
                information technology, to State, local, Tribal, and 
                territorial public health departments, including public 
                health officials in multiple jurisdictions within such 
                State, as appropriate;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) enhancing interoperability of public 
                health data systems (including systems created or 
                accessed by public health departments) with health 
                information technology, including certified health 
                information technology;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(E) supporting earlier disease and 
                health condition detection, such as through near real-
                time data monitoring, to support rapid public health 
                responses; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(F) supporting activities within the 
                applicable jurisdiction related to the expansion and 
                modernization of electronic case reporting;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) as appropriate, conduct activities related 
        to the interoperability and improvement of applicable public 
        health data systems used by the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention, and, in coordination with the Office of the 
        National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, the 
        designation of data and technology standards for health 
        information systems of the public health infrastructure with 
        deference given to standards published by standards development 
        organizations and voluntary consensus-based standards bodies; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) develop and utilize public-private 
        partnerships for technical assistance and related 
        implementation support for State, local, Tribal, and 
        territorial public health departments, and the Centers for 
        Disease Control and Prevention, on the expansion and 
        modernization of electronic case reporting and public health 
        data systems, as applicable.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Requirements.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may not award a 
        grant under subsection (a)(1) unless the applicant supports 
        standards endorsed by the National Coordinator for Health 
        Information Technology pursuant to section 3001(c)(1) or 
        adopted by the Secretary under section 3004.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the 
        requirement under paragraph (1) with respect to an applicant if 
        the Secretary determines that the activities under subsection 
        (a) cannot otherwise be carried out within the applicable 
        jurisdiction.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Application.--A State, local, Tribal, or 
        territorial health department applying for a grant under this 
        section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
        time and in such manner as the Secretary may require. Such 
        application shall include information describing--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) the activities that will be 
                supported by the grant; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) how the modernization of such public 
                health data systems will support or impact the public 
                health infrastructure of the health department, 
                including a description of remaining gaps, if any, and 
                the actions needed to address such gaps.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Use of Funds.--An entity receiving a grant under 
this section may use amounts received under such grant for one or both 
of the following:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Carrying out activities described in 
        subsection (a)(1) to support public health data systems 
        (including electronic case reporting), which may include 
        support for, and training of, professionals with expertise in 
        contributing to and using such systems (including public health 
        data scientists).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Developing and disseminating information 
        related to the use and importance of public health 
        data.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Strategy and Implementation Plan.--Not later than 
180 days after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
Act, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, shall submit to the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, a coordinated 
strategy and an accompanying implementation plan that identifies and 
demonstrates the steps the Secretary will carry out to--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) update and improve applicable public health 
        data systems used by the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) carry out the activities described in this 
        section to support the improvement of State, local, Tribal, and 
        territorial public health data systems.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Consultation.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
consult with State, local, Tribal, and territorial health departments, 
professional medical and public health associations, associations 
representing hospitals or other health care entities, health 
information technology experts, and other appropriate entities 
regarding the plan and grant program to modernize public health data 
systems pursuant to this section. Such activities may include the 
provision of technical assistance related to the exchange of 
information by such public health data systems used by relevant health 
care and public health entities at the local, State, Federal, Tribal, 
and territorial levels.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(f) Report to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the 
date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit a report 
to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives that includes--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) a description of any barriers to--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) public health authorities 
                implementing electronic case reporting and 
                interoperable public health data systems; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) the exchange of information pursuant 
                to electronic case reporting;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) an assessment of the potential public health 
        impact of implementing electronic case reporting and 
        interoperable public health data systems; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) a description of the activities carried out 
        pursuant to this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(g) Electronic Case Reporting.--In this section, the 
term `electronic case reporting' means the automated identification, 
generation, and bilateral exchange of reports of health events among 
electronic health record or health information technology systems and 
public health authorities.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of 
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such 
sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2020 through 
2024.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 406. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), in 
consultation with experts representing a variety of clinical 
specialties, State, tribal, or local public health officials, 
researchers, epidemiologists, statisticians, and community 
organizations, shall establish a program to award competitive grants to 
eligible entities for the purpose of--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) identifying, developing, or disseminating best 
        practices to improve maternal health care quality and outcomes, 
        eliminate preventable maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity, and improve infant health outcomes, which may 
        include--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) information on evidence-based 
                practices to improve the quality and safety of maternal 
                health care in hospitals and other health care settings 
                of a State or health care system, including by 
                addressing topics commonly associated with health 
                complications or risks related to prenatal care, labor 
                care, birthing, and postpartum care;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) best practices for improving maternal 
                health care based on data findings and reviews 
                conducted by a State maternal mortality review 
                committee that address topics of relevance to common 
                complications or health risks related to prenatal care, 
                labor care, birthing, and postpartum care; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) information on addressing determinants 
                of health that impact maternal health outcomes for 
                women before, during, and after pregnancy;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) collaborating with State maternal mortality 
        review committees to identify issues for the development and 
        implementation of evidence-based practices to improve maternal 
        health outcomes and reduce preventable maternal mortality and 
        severe maternal morbidity;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) providing technical assistance and supporting 
        the implementation of best practices identified in paragraph 
        (1) to entities providing health care services to pregnant and 
        postpartum women; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (4) identifying, developing, and evaluating new 
        models of care that improve maternal and infant health 
        outcomes, which may include the integration of community-based 
        services and clinical care.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) submit to the Secretary an application at such 
        time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) demonstrate in such application that the 
        entity has a demonstrated expertise in data-driven maternal 
        safety and quality improvement initiatives in the areas of 
        obstetrics and gynecology or maternal health.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this 
section, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 407. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by 
striking section 763 (42 U.S.C. 294p) and inserting the 
following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 763. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a 
program to award grants to accredited schools of allopathic medicine, 
osteopathic medicine, and nursing, and other health professional 
training programs for the training of health care professionals to 
reduce and prevent discrimination (including training related to 
implicit biases) in the provision of health care services related to 
prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to 
the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Reporting Requirement.--Each entity awarded a grant 
under this section shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report 
on the status of activities conducted using the grant, including a 
description of the impact of such training on patient outcomes, as 
applicable.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and 
disseminate best practices for the training of health care 
professionals to reduce and prevent discrimination (including training 
related to implicit biases) in the provision of health care services 
related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum 
care.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this 
section, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 408. STUDY ON TRAINING TO REDUCE AND PREVENT 
              DISCRIMINATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Not later than 2 years after date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this 
section as the ``Secretary'') shall, through a contract with an 
independent research organization, study and make recommendations for 
accredited schools of allopathic medicine, osteopathic medicine, and 
nursing, and other health professional training programs on best 
practices related to training to reduce and prevent discrimination, 
including training related to implicit biases, in the provision of 
health care services related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, 
and postpartum care.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 409. PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Section 317K(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 247b-12(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(E)(i) The Secretary, acting through the 
                Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
                Prevention and in coordination with other offices and 
                agencies, as appropriate, shall establish or continue a 
                competitive grant program for the establishment or 
                support of perinatal quality collaboratives to improve 
                perinatal care and perinatal health outcomes for 
                pregnant and postpartum women and their infants. A 
                State or Indian Tribe may use funds received through 
                such grant to--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(I) support the use of evidence-
                        based or evidence-informed practices to improve 
                        outcomes for maternal and infant 
                        health;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(II) work with clinical teams; 
                        experts; State, local, and, as appropriate, 
                        tribal public health officials; and 
                        stakeholders, including patients and families, 
                        to identify, develop, or disseminate best 
                        practices to improve perinatal care and 
                        outcomes; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(III) employ strategies that 
                        provide opportunities for health care 
                        professionals and clinical teams to collaborate 
                        across health care settings and disciplines, 
                        including primary care and mental health, as 
                        appropriate, to improve maternal and infant 
                        health outcomes, which may include the use of 
                        data to provide timely feedback across hospital 
                        and clinical teams to inform responses, and to 
                        provide support and training to hospital and 
                        clinical teams for quality improvement, as 
                        appropriate.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(ii) To be eligible for a grant under 
                clause (i), an entity shall submit to the Secretary an 
                application in such form and manner and containing such 
                information as the Secretary may require.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 410. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM 
              WOMEN.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Grants.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act is 
amended by inserting after section 330N of such Act, as added by 
section 404, the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 330O. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM 
              WOMEN.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants for the 
purpose of establishing or operating evidence-based or innovative, 
evidence-informed programs to deliver integrated health care services 
to pregnant and postpartum women to optimize the health of women and 
their infants, including to reduce adverse maternal health outcomes, 
pregnancy-related deaths, and related health disparities (including 
such disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
populations), and as appropriate, by addressing issues researched under 
subsection (b)(2) of section 317K.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Integrated Services for Pregnant and Postpartum 
Women.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a 
        grant under subsection (a), a State or Indian Tribe (as defined 
        in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
        Assistance Act) shall work with relevant stakeholders that 
        coordinate care (including coordinating resources and referrals 
        for health care and social services) to develop and carry out 
        the program, including--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) State, tribal, and local agencies 
                responsible for Medicaid, public health, social 
                services, mental health, and substance use disorder 
                treatment and services;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) health care providers who serve 
                pregnant women; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) community-based health organizations 
                and health workers, including providers of home 
                visiting services and individuals representing 
                communities with disproportionately high rates of 
                maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity, and 
                including those representing racial and ethnicity 
                minority populations.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Terms.--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) Limitation.--The Secretary may award 
                a grant under subsection (a) to up to 10 
                States.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) Period.--A grant awarded under 
                subsection (a) shall be made for a period of 5 
                years.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) Prioritization.--In awarding grants 
                under subsection (a), the Secretary shall prioritize 
                applications from States or Indian Tribes with the 
                highest rates of maternal mortality and severe maternal 
                morbidity, and shall consider health disparities 
                related to maternal mortality and severe maternal 
                morbidity, including such disparities associated with 
                racial and ethnic minority populations.</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall 
                require grantees to evaluate the outcomes of the 
                programs supported under the grant.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are 
authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as 
may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2020 through 
2024.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Report on Grant Outcomes and Dissemination of Best 
Practices.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) Report.--Not later than April 1, 2025, the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to the 
        Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
        Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives a report that describes--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (A) the outcomes of the activities 
                supported by the grants awarded under the amendments 
                made by this section on maternal and child 
                health;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (B) best practices and models of care used 
                by recipients of grants under such amendments; 
                and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    (C) obstacles identified by recipients of 
                grants under such amendments, and strategies used by 
                such recipients to deliver care, improve maternal and 
                child health, and reduce health disparities.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) Dissemination of best practices.--Not later 
        than October 1, 2025, the Secretary of Health and Human 
        Services shall disseminate information on best practices and 
        models of care used by recipients of grants under the 
        amendments made by this section (including best practices and 
        models of care relating to the reduction of health disparities, 
        including such disparities associated with racial and ethnic 
        minority populations, in rates of maternal mortality and severe 
        maternal morbidity) to relevant stakeholders, which may include 
        health providers, medical schools, nursing schools, relevant 
        State, tribal, and local agencies, and the general 
        public.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 411. EXTENSION FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS, THE NATIONAL 
              HEALTH SERVICE CORPS, AND TEACHING HEALTH CENTERS THAT 
              OPERATE GME PROGRAMS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Community Health Centers Funding.--Section 
10503(b)(1)(F) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 
U.S.C. 254b-2(b)(1)(F)) is amended by striking ``fiscal year 2019'' and 
inserting ``each of fiscal years 2019 through 2024''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) National Health Service Corps.--Section 10503(b)(2)(F) 
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-
2(b)(2)(F)) is amended by striking ``and 2019'' and inserting ``through 
2024''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (c) Teaching Health Centers That Operate Graduate Medical 
Education Programs.--Section 340H(g)(1) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 256h(g)(1)) is amended by striking ``and 2019'' and 
inserting ``through 2024''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (d) Application of Provisions.--Amounts appropriated 
pursuant to this section for each of fiscal years 2019 through 2024 
shall be subject to the requirements contained in Public Law 115-245 
for funds for programs authorized under sections 330 through 340 of the 
Public Health Service Act.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (e) Conforming Amendments.--Paragraph (4) of section 
3014(h) of title 18, United States Code, as amended by section 50901 of 
Public Law 115-123, is amended by striking ``and section 50901(e) of 
the Advancing Chronic Care, Extenders, and Social Services Act'' and 
inserting ``, section 50901(e) of the Advancing Chronic Care, 
Extenders, and Social Services Act, and section 411(d) of the Lower 
Health Care Costs Act''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 412. OTHER PROGRAMS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) Type I.--Section 330B(b)(2)(D) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-2(b)(2)(D)) is amended by striking ``and 
2019'' and inserting ``through 2024''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Indians.--Subparagraph (D) of section 330C(c)(2) of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-3(c)(2)(D)) is amended by 
striking ``and 2019'' and inserting ``through 2024''.</DELETED>

          <DELETED>TITLE V--IMPROVING THE EXCHANGE OF HEALTH 
                         INFORMATION</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 501. REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE HEALTH CLAIMS, NETWORK, AND 
              COST INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amended by inserting 
after section 2715A the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 2715B. REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE HEALTH CLAIMS, NETWORK, 
              AND COST INFORMATION.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
shall make available for access, exchange, or use without special 
effort, through application programming interfaces (or successor 
technology or standards), the information described in subsection (b), 
in the manner described in subsection (b) and otherwise consistent with 
this section.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Information.--The following information is required 
to be made available, in such form and manner as the Secretary may 
specify, as described in subsection (a):</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Historical claims, provider encounter, and 
        payment data for each enrollee, which shall--</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) include adjudicated medical and 
                prescription drug claims and equivalent encounters, 
                including all data elements contained in such 
                transactions--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) that were adjudicated by the 
                        group health plan or health insurance issuer 
                        during the previous 5 years or the enrollee's 
                        entire period of enrollment in the applicable 
                        plan or coverage if such period is less than 5 
                        years;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) that involve benefits 
                        managed by any third party, such as a pharmacy 
                        benefits manager or radiology benefits manager 
                        that manages benefits or adjudicates claims on 
                        behalf of the plan or coverage; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) from any other health plan 
                        or health insurance coverage issued or 
                        administered by the same insurance issuer, in 
                        which the same enrollee was enrolled during the 
                        previous 5 years; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) be available--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) in a single, longitudinal 
                        format that is easy to understand and secure, 
                        and that may update automatically, including by 
                        using the standards adopted for implementation 
                        of section 3001(c)(5)(D)(iv);</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) as soon as practicable, and 
                        in no case later than the period of time 
                        determined by the Secretary, after the claim is 
                        adjudicated or the data is received by the 
                        health plan or health insurance issuer; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) to the enrollee, and any 
                        providers or third-party applications or 
                        services authorized by the enrollee, for 5 
                        years after the end date of the enrollee's 
                        enrollment in the plan or in any coverage 
                        offered by the health insurance 
                        issuer.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Identifying directory information for all 
        in-network providers, including facilities and practitioners, 
        that participate in the plan or coverage, which shall--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) include--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) the national provider 
                        identifier for in-network facilities and 
                        practitioners; and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) the name, address, phone 
                        number, and specialty for each such facility 
                        and practitioner, based on the most recent 
                        interaction between the plan or coverage and 
                        that facility or practitioner;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) be capable of returning a list of 
                participating in-network facilities and practitioners, 
                in a given specialty or at a particular facility type, 
                within a specified geographic radius; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) be capable of returning the network 
                status, when presented with identifiers for a given 
                enrollee and facility or practitioner.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) Estimated patient out-of-pocket costs, 
        including costs expected to be incurred through a deductible, 
        copayment, coinsurance, or other form of cost-sharing, for--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) a designated set of common services 
                or episodes of care, to be established by the Secretary 
                through rulemaking, including, at a minimum--</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(i) in the case of services 
                        provided by a hospital, the 100 most common 
                        diagnosis-related groups, as used in the 
                        Medicare Inpatient Prospective Patient System 
                        (or successor episode-based reimbursement 
                        methodology) at that hospital, based on claims 
                        data adjudicated by the group health plan or 
                        health insurance issuer;</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(ii) in the case of services 
                        provided in an outpatient setting, including 
                        radiology, lab tests, and outpatient surgical 
                        procedures, any service rendered by the 
                        facility or practitioner, and reimbursed by the 
                        health plan or health insurance issuer; 
                        and</DELETED>
                        <DELETED>    ``(iii) in the case of post-acute 
                        care, including home health providers, skilled 
                        nursing facilities, inpatient rehabilitation 
                        facilities, and long-term care hospitals, the 
                        patient out-of-pocket costs for an episode of 
                        care, as the Secretary may determine, which 
                        permits users to reasonably compare costs 
                        across different facility and service types; 
                        and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) all prescription drugs currently 
                included on any tier of the formulary of the plan or 
                coverage.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Availability and Access.--The application 
programming interfaces, including all data required to be made 
available through such interfaces, shall--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) be made available by the applicable group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer, at no charge, to--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) enrollees in the group health plan 
                or health insurance coverage;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) third parties authorized by the 
                enrollee;</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(C) facilities and practitioners who are 
                under contract with the plan or coverage; and</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(D) business associates of such 
                facilities and practitioners, as defined in section 
                160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
                any successor regulations);</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) be available to enrollees in the group 
        health plan or health insurance coverage, and to third-party 
        applications or services facilitating such access by enrollees, 
        during the enrollment process and for a minimum of 5 years 
        after the end date of the enrollee's enrollment in the plan or 
        in any coverage offered by the health insurance 
        issuer;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) permit persistent access by third-party 
        applications or services authorized by the enrollee, for a 
        reasonable period of time, consistent with current security 
        practices;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) employ the applicable content, vocabulary, 
        and technical standards, including, as appropriate, such 
        standards adopted by the Secretary pursuant to title XXX; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(5) employ security and authentication 
        standards, as the Secretary determines appropriate.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(d) Rule of Construction Regarding Privacy.--Nothing in 
this section shall be construed to alter existing obligations under the 
privacy, security, and breach notification rules promulgated under 
section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (or successor regulations), under part 2 of title 42, Code of 
Federal Regulations (or successor regulations), under section 444 of 
the General Education Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g) (commonly 
referred to as the `Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 
1974'), under the amendments made by the Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act, or under State privacy law.''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2715B of the Public Health 
Service Act, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect 1 year after 
the date of enactment of this Act.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 502. RECOGNITION OF SECURITY PRACTICES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    Part 1 of subtitle D of the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:</DELETED>

<DELETED>``SEC. 13412. RECOGNITION OF SECURITY PRACTICES.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    ``(a) In General.--Consistent with the authority of the 
Secretary under sections 1176 and 1177 of the Social Security Act, when 
making determinations relating to fines under section 13410, decreasing 
the length and extent of an audit under section 13411, or remedies 
otherwise agreed to by the Secretary, the Secretary shall consider 
whether the entity or business associate had, for not less than the 
previous 12 months, recognized security practices in place that may--
</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) mitigate fines under section 
        13410;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) result in the early, favorable termination 
        of an audit under section 13411; and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) limit the remedies that would otherwise be 
        agreed to in any agreement between the entity or business 
        associate and the Department of Health and Human 
        Services.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(b) Additional Consideration.--At the election of the 
entity or business associate, the Secretary may provide further 
consideration to an entity or business associate that can adequately 
demonstrate that such recognized security practices were in place, as 
determined by the Secretary.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    ``(c) Definition and Miscellaneous Provisions.--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(1) Recognized security practices.--The term 
        `recognized security practices' means the standards, 
        guidelines, best practices, methodologies, procedures, and 
        processes developed under section 2(c)(15) of the National 
        Institute of Standards and Technology Act, the approaches 
        promulgated under section 405(d) of the Cybersecurity 
        Information Sharing Act of 2015, and any other program or 
        processes that are equivalent to such requirements as may be 
        developed through regulations. Such practices shall be 
        determined by the entity or business associate, except where 
        additional consideration is requested under subsection 
        (b).</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(2) Limitation.--Nothing in this section shall 
        be construed as providing the Secretary authority to--
        </DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(A) increase fines under section 13410, 
                or the length, extent or quantity of audits under 
                section 13411, due to a lack of compliance with the 
                recognized security practices; or</DELETED>
                <DELETED>    ``(B) mandate, direct, or condition the 
                award of any Federal grant, contract, or purchase, on 
                compliance with such recognized security 
                practices.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(3) No liability for nonparticipation.--Nothing 
        in this section shall be construed to subject an entity or 
        business associate to liability for electing not to engage in 
        the recognized security practices defined by this 
        section.</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
        section shall be construed to limit the Secretary's authority 
        to enforce the HIPAA Security rule (part 160 of title 45, Code 
        of Federal Regulations, and subparts A and C of part 164 of 
        such title), or to supersede or conflict with an entity or 
        business associate's obligations under the HIPAA Security 
        rule.''.</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 503. GAO STUDY ON THE PRIVACY AND SECURITY RISKS OF 
              ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE 
              HEALTH INFORMATION TO AND FROM ENTITIES NOT COVERED BY 
              THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
              ACT.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall conduct a study to--</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (1) describe the roles of Federal agencies and the 
        private sector with respect to protecting the privacy and 
        security of individually identifiable health information 
        transmitted electronically to and from entities not covered by 
        the regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 
        1320d-2 note);</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (2) identify recent developments regarding the use 
        of application programming interfaces to access individually 
        identifiable health information, and implications for the 
        privacy and security of such information;</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (3) identify practices in the private sector, such 
        as terms and conditions for use, relating to the privacy, 
        disclosure, and secondary uses of individually identifiable 
        health information transmitted electronically to or from 
        entities, selected by an individual, that are not subject to 
        the regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996; 
        and</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    (4) identify steps the public and private sectors 
        can take to improve the private and secure access to and 
        availability of individually identifiable health 
        information.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to Congress a report concerning the findings of the study 
conducted under subsection (a).</DELETED>

<DELETED>SEC. 504. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS.</DELETED>

<DELETED>    (a) In General.--Section 3022(b) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300jj-52(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:</DELETED>
        <DELETED>    ``(4) Application of authorities under inspector 
        general act of 1978.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
        Inspector General shall have the same authorities as provided 
        under section 6 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
        App.).''.</DELETED>
<DELETED>    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the 21st Century 
Cures Act (Public Law 114-255).</DELETED>

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Lower Health Care 
Costs Act''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.

                 TITLE I--ENDING SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS

Sec. 101. Protecting patients against out-of-network deductibles in 
                            emergencies.
Sec. 102. Protection against surprise bills.
Sec. 103. Benchmark for payment.
Sec. 104. Effective date.
Sec. 105. Ending surprise air ambulance bills.
Sec. 106. Report.

          TITLE II--REDUCING THE PRICES OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS

Sec. 201. Biological product patent transparency.
Sec. 202. Orange Book modernization.
Sec. 203. Ensuring timely access to generics.
Sec. 204. Protecting access to biological products.
Sec. 205. Preventing blocking of generic drugs.
Sec. 206. Education on biological products.
Sec. 207. Biological product innovation.
Sec. 208. Clarifying the meaning of new chemical entity.
Sec. 209. Streamlining the transition of biological products.
Sec. 210. Orphan drug clarification.
Sec. 211. Prompt approval of drugs related to safety information.
Sec. 212. Conditions of use for biosimilar biological products.
Sec. 213. Modernizing the labeling of certain generic drugs.
Sec. 214. Actions for delays of generic drugs and biosimilar biological 
                            products.
Sec. 215. Reducing the price of prescription drugs.

            TITLE III--IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTH CARE

Sec. 301. Increasing transparency by removing gag clauses on price and 
                            quality information.
Sec. 302. Banning anticompetitive terms in facility and insurance 
                            contracts that limit access to higher 
                            quality, lower cost care.
Sec. 303. Designation of a nongovernmental, nonprofit transparency 
                            organization to lower Americans' health 
                            care costs.
Sec. 304. Protecting patients and improving the accuracy of provider 
                            directory information.
Sec. 305. Timely bills for patients.
Sec. 306. Health plan oversight of pharmacy benefit manager services.
Sec. 307. Government Accountability Office study on profit- and 
                            revenue-sharing in health care.
Sec. 308. Disclosure of direct and indirect compensation for brokers 
                            and consultants to employer-sponsored 
                            health plans and enrollees in plans on the 
                            individual market.
Sec. 309. Ensuring enrollee access to cost-sharing information.
Sec. 310. Strengthening parity in mental health and substance use 
                            disorder benefits.
Sec. 311. Technical amendments.
Sec. 312. Third-party administrators.
Sec. 313. Group health plan reporting requirements.
Sec. 314. Study by Comptroller General of United States.

                   TITLE IV--IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH

Sec. 401. Improving awareness of disease prevention.
Sec. 402. Grants to address vaccine-preventable diseases.
Sec. 403. Guide on evidence-based strategies for public health 
                            department obesity prevention programs.
Sec. 404. Expanding capacity for health outcomes.
Sec. 405. Public health data system modernization.
Sec. 406. Innovation for maternal health.
Sec. 407. Training for health care providers.
Sec. 408. Study on training to reduce and prevent discrimination.
Sec. 409. Perinatal quality collaboratives.
Sec. 410. Integrated services for pregnant and postpartum women.
Sec. 411. Extension for community health centers, the national health 
                            service corps, and teaching health centers 
                            that operate GME programs.
Sec. 412. Other programs.
Sec. 413. Native American suicide prevention.
Sec. 414. Minimum age of sale of tobacco products.
Sec. 415. Sale of tobacco products to individuals under the age of 21.

         TITLE V--IMPROVING THE EXCHANGE OF HEALTH INFORMATION

Sec. 501. Requirement to provide health claims, network, and cost 
                            information.
Sec. 502. Recognition of security practices.
Sec. 503. GAO study on the privacy and security risks of electronic 
                            transmission of individually identifiable 
                            health information to and from entities not 
                            covered by the Health Insurance Portability 
                            and Accountability Act.
Sec. 504. Technical corrections.
Sec. 505. Public meeting.

                 TITLE I--ENDING SURPRISE MEDICAL BILLS

SEC. 101. PROTECTING PATIENTS AGAINST OUT-OF-NETWORK DEDUCTIBLES IN 
              EMERGENCIES.

    Section 2719A(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-
19a) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (1)--
                    (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
                inserting ``or a freestanding emergency room'' after 
                ``hospital''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (C)--
                            (i) in clause (ii)(I), by inserting ``or 
                        freestanding emergency room'' after ``emergency 
                        department''; and
                            (ii) in subparagraph (C)(ii)(II), by 
                        adding, ``a deductible,'' after ``(expressed 
                        as''; and
            (2) in paragraph (2)(B)--
                    (A) in clause (i)--
                            (i) by inserting ``or freestanding 
                        emergency room'' after ``hospital''; and
                            (ii) by inserting ``or freestanding 
                        emergency room'' after ``emergency 
                        department''; and
                    (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or freestanding 
                emergency room'' after ``hospital''.

SEC. 102. PROTECTION AGAINST SURPRISE BILLS.

    (a) PHSA.--Section 2719A of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300gg-19a) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(e) Out-of-network Ancillary Services.--
            ``(1) Coverage of services.--Subject to subsection (h), in 
        the case of an enrollee in a group health plan or group or 
        individual health insurance coverage who receives out-of-
        network ancillary services at an in-network facility, including 
        any referrals for diagnostic services, and such services would 
        be covered under such plan or coverage if provided in-network--
                    ``(A) the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a 
                copayment amount, coinsurance rate, or deductible) with 
                respect to such services shall be the same requirement 
                that would apply if such services were provided by an 
                in-network practitioner, and any coinsurance or 
                deductible shall be based on in-network rates; and
                    ``(B) amounts paid toward such cost-sharing shall 
                be counted towards the in-network deductible and in-
                network out-of-pocket maximum amount, as applicable, 
                under the plan or coverage for the plan year.
            ``(2) Notice before providing non-emergency services.--
        Subject to subsection (h), in the case of an enrollee in a 
        group health plan or group or individual health insurance 
        coverage who receives out-of-network, non-emergency services 
        that are not ancillary services, from an out-of-network 
        provider at an in-network facility, and such services would be 
        covered under such plan or coverage if provided in-network, the 
        cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a copayment amount, 
        coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect to such services 
        shall be the same requirement that would apply if such services 
        were provided by an in-network practitioner, and any 
        coinsurance or deductible shall be based on in-network rates, 
        unless, as soon as practicable, and in no case later than 48 
        hours prior to providing non-emergency services that are not 
        ancillary services--
                    ``(A) the in-network facility provides to the 
                enrollee who is scheduled to receive such services 
                notice that--
                            ``(i) is provided in paper or electronic 
                        form (and including electronic notification 
                        whenever practicable);
                            ``(ii) states that such service will be 
                        provided out-of-network;
                            ``(iii) includes the estimated amount that 
                        such practitioner or facility may charge the 
                        enrollee for such services; and
                            ``(iv) provides the option to affirmatively 
                        consent to receiving such services from such 
                        practitioner or facility;
                    ``(B) such enrollee signs such notice consenting to 
                receive such services from an out-of-network provider 
                at an in-network facility, and acknowledging that the 
                out-of-network services may be covered at an out-of-
                network cost-sharing amount, requiring higher cost-
                sharing obligations of the enrollee than if the service 
                were provided by an in-network practitioner or 
                facility; and
                    ``(C) such facility maintains documentation of the 
                enrollee's signature or confirmation of receipt of such 
                information under subparagraph (B) in the enrollee's 
                patient record for 2 years after the date of services.
            ``(3) Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
        term `facility' has the meaning given the term `health care 
        facility' in section 2729A(c).
    ``(f) Coverage of Out-of-network Services for Enrollees Admitted 
After Emergency Services.--
            ``(1) Protection for enrollees admitted to the hospital for 
        emergency services prior to stabilization.--In the case of an 
        enrollee in a group health plan or group or individual health 
        insurance coverage who receives emergency services, or maternal 
        care for a woman in labor, in the emergency department of an 
        out-of-network facility and has not been stabilized (within the 
        meaning of subsection (b)(2)(C)), if the patient is 
        subsequently admitted to the out-of-network facility for care, 
        the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a copayment amount, 
        coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect to any out-of-
        network services provided to the enrollee prior to being stable 
        and in a condition to receive information under (2), is the 
        same requirement that would apply as under subsection 
        (b)(2)(C)(ii)(II).
            ``(2) Notice and consent.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Subject to subsection (h), in 
                the case of an enrollee in a group health plan or group 
                or individual health insurance coverage who receives 
                emergency services, or maternal care for a woman in 
                labor, in the emergency department of an out-of-network 
                facility and has been stabilized (within the meaning of 
                subsection (b)(2)(C)), if the patient is subsequently 
                admitted to the out-of-network facility for care, the 
                cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a copayment 
                amount, coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect 
                to any out-of-network services is the same requirement 
                that would apply if such services were provided by an 
                in-network provider, unless the enrollee, once stable 
                and in a condition to receive such information, 
                including having sufficient mental capacity--
                            ``(i) has been provided by the facility, 
                        prior to the provision of any post-
                        stabilization, out-of-network service at such 
                        facility, with--
                                    ``(I) paper or electronic 
                                notification that the practitioner or 
                                facility is an out-of-network health 
                                care provider and the out-of-network 
                                rate of the provider, as applicable, 
                                and the option to affirmatively consent 
                                to receiving services from such 
                                practitioner or facility; and
                                    ``(II) the estimated amount that 
                                such provider may charge the 
                                participant, beneficiary, or enrollee 
                                for such services involved;
                            ``(ii) has been provided by the plan or 
                        coverage, prior to the provision of any post-
                        stabilization, out-of-network service at such 
                        facility, with--
                                    ``(I) paper or electronic 
                                notification (and including electronic 
                                notification whenever practicable) that 
                                the practitioner or facility is an out-
                                of-network health care provider, and 
                                the option to affirmatively consent to 
                                receiving services from such 
                                practitioner or facility;
                                    ``(II) a list of in-network 
                                practitioners or facilities in the 
                                relevant geographic area that could 
                                provide the same services, and an 
                                option for a referral to such 
                                providers; and
                                    ``(III) information about whether 
                                prior authorization or other care 
                                management limitations may be required 
                                in advance of receiving in-network 
                                services at the facility;
                            ``(iii) has acknowledged, in writing, that 
                        the out-of-network services provided after the 
                        individual has been stabilized may not be 
                        covered or may be covered at an out-of-network 
                        cost-sharing amount, requiring higher cost-
                        sharing obligations of the enrollee than if the 
                        service were provided at an in-network 
                        facility.
                    ``(B) Requirements of notice.--The notice under 
                subparagraph (A) shall be in a format determined by the 
                Secretary to give a reasonable layperson clear 
                comprehension of the terms of the agreement, including 
                all possible financial responsibilities, including the 
                requirements that the notice--
                            ``(i) does not exceed one page in length;
                            ``(ii) is readily identifiable for its 
                        purpose and as a contract of consent;
                            ``(iii) clearly states that consent to 
                        potential out-of-network charges is optional 
                        and that the enrollee has the choice to 
                        transfer to an in-network facility;
                            ``(iv) includes an estimate of the amount 
                        that such provider will charge the participant, 
                        beneficiary, or enrollee for such services 
                        involved; and
                            ``(v) be available in the 15 most common 
                        languages in the facility's geographic area, 
                        with the facility making a good faith effort to 
                        provide oral notice in the enrollee's primary 
                        language if it is not one of such 15 languages.
                    ``(C) Maintenance of records.--A facility shall 
                maintain documentation of notice given to an enrollee 
                pursuant to this subsection and the enrollee's 
                confirmation of receipt of such information in the 
                enrollee's patient record for 2 years after the date of 
                services.
            ``(3) Rulemaking.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
        of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the Secretary 
        shall issue regulations to carry out this subsection, which 
        shall include clarification on how to determine whether an 
        individual is stabilized and the timing of the notice required 
        under this paragraph.
    ``(g) Prohibition on Billing More Than an In-network Rate Under 
Certain Circumstances.--
            ``(1) In general.--A facility or practitioner furnishing--
                    ``(A) emergency services, as defined in subsection 
                (b)(2), regardless of the State in which the patient 
                resides;
                    ``(B) out-of-network services at an in-network 
                facility described in subsection (e)(1);
                    ``(C) out-of-network services at an in-network 
                facility described in subsection (e)(2), where the 
                notice and consent for receiving such services out-of-
                network did not meet the requirement of such 
                subsection;
                    ``(D) services furnished by an out-of-network 
                provider after an enrollee has been admitted to the 
                hospital for emergency services but prior to 
                stabilization, as described in subsection (f)(1); or
                    ``(E) out-of-network services furnished after the 
                enrollee has been stabilized (within the meaning of 
                subsection (b)(2)(C)), where the notice and option for 
                receiving care at an alternate facility required under 
                subsection (f)(2) have not been provided to the 
                enrollee and the enrollee did not give consent under 
                subsection (f)(3),
        may not bill an enrollee in a group health plan or group or 
        individual health insurance coverage for amounts beyond the 
        cost-sharing amount that would apply under subsection 
        (b)(1)(C)(ii)(II), (e)(1), (e)(2), or (f), as applicable.
            ``(2) Notice.--A facility furnishing services described in 
        paragraph (1) shall provide enrollees in a group health plan or 
        group or individual health insurance coverage with a one-page 
        notice, in 16-point font, upon intake at the emergency room or 
        being admitted at the facility of the prohibition on balance 
        billing under paragraph (1) and who to contact for recourse if 
        they are sent a balance bill in violation of such paragraph. 
        The facility shall be responsible for obtaining the signature 
        from the enrollee on such notice. The Secretary shall issue 
        regulations within 6 months of the date of enactment of the 
        Lower Health Care Costs Act on the requirements for the notice 
        under this paragraph.
    ``(h) Maintaining State Surprise Billing Protections.--
            ``(1) In general.--Nothing in this section shall prevent a 
        State from establishing or continuing in effect, with respect 
        to health insurance issuers, facilities, or practitioners, an 
        alternate method under State law for determining the 
        appropriate compensation for services described in subsection 
        (b), (e), or (f).
            ``(2) Additional application.--In the case of group health 
        plans or group or individual health insurance coverage offered 
        in a State that has not established an alternate method 
        described in paragraph (1), such as arbitration or a benchmark, 
        or for services described in subsection (b), (e), or (f) that 
        are not covered by such State's alternate method described in 
        paragraph (1), the provisions of this section shall apply.
            ``(3) Self-insured plans.--Subsections (b), (e), and (f) 
        shall apply to a self-insured group health plan that is not 
        subject to State insurance regulation.
    ``(i) Definitions.--In this section:
            ``(1) In-network.--The term `in-network', with respect to a 
        group health plan or health insurance coverage means a provider 
        that has a contractual relationship with the plan.
            ``(2) Enrollee.--The term `enrollee', with respect to 
        health insurance coverage or a group health plan, includes a 
        participant, dependent, or beneficiary.
            ``(3) Ancillary services.--The term `ancillary services' 
        means non-emergency care that is--
                    ``(A) provided by anesthesiologists, pathologists, 
                emergency medicine providers, intensivists, 
                radiologists, neonatologists, hospitalists, and 
                assistant surgeons, whether the care is provided by a 
                physician or non-physician practitioner;
                    ``(B) a diagnostic service (including radiology and 
                lab services); or
                    ``(C) provided by such other specialty practitioner 
                not typically selected by the patients receiving the 
                care, which the Secretary may add periodically to such 
                definition through rulemaking.''.
    (b) Enforcement of Balance Billing Prohibitions.--Part C of title 
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-91 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2795. ENFORCEMENT OF BALANCE BILLING PROHIBITIONS.

    ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a facility or 
practitioner that violates a requirement under section 2719A(g)(1) or 
fails to provide notice or obtain consent as required under subsection 
(e)(2) or (f)(2) shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not 
more than $10,000 for each act constituting such violation.
    ``(b) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A of the Social 
Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the first sentence 
of subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall apply to civil money 
penalties under this subsection in the same manner as such provisions 
apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A of the Social 
Security Act.
    ``(c) Safe Harbor.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall waive the penalties 
        described under subsection (a) with respect to a facility or, 
        practitioner who does not knowingly violate, and should not 
        have reasonably known it violated, section 2719A(g)(1) with 
        respect to an enrollee, if such facility or practitioner, 
        within 30 days of the violation, withdraws the bill that was in 
        violation of section 2719A(g)(1), and, as applicable, 
        reimburses the group health plan, health insurance issuer, or 
        enrollee, in an amount equal to the difference between the 
        amount billed and the amount allowed to be billed under section 
        2719A(g)(1), plus interest, at an interest rate determined by 
        the Secretary.
            ``(2) Hardship exemption.--The Secretary may establish a 
        hardship exemption to the penalties under this section.
            ``(3) State enforcement.--The Secretary shall waive 
        penalties under this section with respect to a facility or 
        practitioner that has already been subject to enforcement 
        action under State law for a violation described in subsection 
        (a).''.
    (c) Application to Grandfathered Plans.--Section 1251(a) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18011(a)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
            ``(5) Application of additional provisions.--Subsections 
        (b) through (h) of section 2719A of the Public Health Service 
        Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a) shall apply to grandfathered health 
        plans for plan years beginning with the second plan year that 
        begins after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care 
        Costs Act.''.
    (d) Coverage Under Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.--
Section 8904 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
    ``(c) Any health benefits plan offered under this chapter shall be 
treated as a group health plan or group or individual health insurance 
coverage for purposes of subsections (e) through (g) of section 2719A 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a) (except for 
paragraph (3) of such subsection (g)).''.

SEC. 103. BENCHMARK FOR PAYMENT.

    (a) In General.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 2729A. BENCHMARK FOR PAYMENT.

    ``(a) Establishment of Benchmark.--A group health plan or health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
shall pay providers, including facilities and practitioners, furnishing 
services for which such facilities and practitioners are prohibited 
under section 2719A(g) from billing enrollees for amounts beyond the 
cost-sharing amount that would apply under subsection 
(b)(1)(C)(ii)(II), (e), or (f) of section 2719A,the median in-network 
rate for such services provided to enrollees, using a methodology 
determined under subsection (b) for the same or similar services 
offered by the group health plan or health insurance issuer in that 
geographic region. Such payment shall be made in a timely fashion in 
order to ensure compliance with sections 399V-7 and 2729D.
    ``(b) Median In-network Rate.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term 
        `median in-network rate' means, with respect to health care 
        services covered by a group health plan or group or individual 
        health insurance coverage, the median contracted rate under the 
        applicable plan or coverage recognized under the plan or 
        coverage as the total maximum payment for the service minus the 
        in-network cost-sharing for such service under the plan or 
        coverage, for the same or a similar service that is provided by 
        a provider in the same or similar specialty and in the 
        geographic region in which the service is furnished.
            ``(2) Rulemaking.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
                date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, 
                the Secretary shall, through rulemaking, determine the 
                methodology a group health plan or health insurance 
                issuer is required to use to determine the median in-
                network rate described in paragraph (1), 
                differentiating by business line, the information the 
                plan or issuer shall share with the out-of-network 
                provider involved when making such a determination, and 
                the geographic regions applied for purposes of this 
                subsection. Such rulemaking shall take into account 
                payments that are made by health insurance issuers that 
                are not on a fee-for-service basis.
                    ``(B) Geographic regions.--In establishing 
                geographic regions under subparagraph (A), the 
                Secretary shall consider adequate access to services in 
                rural areas and health professional shortage areas, as 
                defined in section 332. The Secretary shall consult 
                with the National Association of Insurance 
                Commissioners in establishing the geographic regions. 
                The Secretary shall update the geographic regions 
                periodically, as appropriate, taking into account the 
                findings of the report under section 106 of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act.
            ``(3) Certain insurers.--If a group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage does not have sufficient information to calculate a 
        median in-network rate for this service or provider type, or 
        amount of, claims for services (as determined by the applicable 
        State authority, in the case of health insurance coverage, or 
        by the Secretary of Labor, in the case of a self-insured group 
        health plan) covered under the list of out-of-network services 
        set by the State authority or Secretary of Labor, as 
        applicable, in a particular geographic area, such plan or 
        issuer shall demonstrate that it will use a database free of 
        conflicts of interest that has sufficient information 
        reflecting allowed amounts paid to individual health care 
        providers for relevant services provided in the applicable 
        geographic region, and that such plan or issuer will use that 
        database to determine a median in-network rate. The group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the cost of 
        accessing the database.
            ``(4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection 
        shall prevent a group health plan or health insurance issuer 
        from establishing separate calculations of a median in-network 
        rate under paragraph (1) for services delivered in nonhospital 
        facilities, including freestanding emergency rooms.
    ``(c) Facility.--For purposes of this section, the term `health 
care facility' or `facility' includes hospitals, hospital outpatient 
departments, critical access hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, 
laboratories, radiology clinics, freestanding emergency rooms, and any 
other facility that provides services that are covered under a group 
health plan or health insurance coverage, including settings of care 
subject to section 2719A(b).''.
    (b) Non-Federal Governmental Plans.--Section 2722(a)(2)(E) of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-21(a)(2)(E)) is amended by 
inserting ``, except that such election shall be available with respect 
to section 2729A'' before the period.

SEC. 104. EFFECTIVE DATE.

    The amendments made by sections 101, 102, and 103 shall take effect 
beginning in the second plan year that begins after the date of 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 105. ENDING SURPRISE AIR AMBULANCE BILLS.

    (a) In General.--Part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service 
Act is amended by inserting after section 2719A (42 U.S.C. 300gg-19a) 
the following:

``SEC. 2719B. ENDING SURPRISE AIR AMBULANCE BILLS.

    ``(a) In General.--In the case of an enrollee in a group health 
plan or group or individual health insurance coverage who receives air 
ambulance services from an out-of-network provider, if such services 
would be covered if provided by an in-network provider--
            ``(1) the cost-sharing requirement (expressed as a 
        copayment amount, coinsurance rate, or deductible) with respect 
        to such services shall be the same requirement that would apply 
        if such services were provided by an in-network practitioner, 
        and any coinsurance or deductible shall be based on in-network 
        rates; and
            ``(2) such cost-sharing amounts shall be counted towards 
        the in-network deductible and in-network out-of-pocket maximum 
        amount under the plan or coverage for the plan year.
    ``(b) Payment Rate.--A group health plan or health insurance issuer 
shall pay for air ambulance services for purposes of subsection (a) at 
the median in-network as defined in subsection (c).
    ``(c) Median In-network Rate.--
            ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term 
        `median in-network rate' means, with respect to air ambulance 
        services covered by a group health plan or group or individual 
        health insurance coverage, the median contracted rate under the 
        applicable plan or coverage recognized under the plan or 
        coverage as the total maximum payment for the service, minus 
        the in-network cost-sharing for such service under the plan or 
        coverage, for the same or a similar service that is provided by 
        a provider in the same or similar specialty, and in the 
        geographic region in which the service is furnished.
            ``(2) Rulemaking.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Not later than 6 months after 
                the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
                Act, the Secretary shall, through rulemaking, determine 
                the methodology a group health plan or health insurance 
                issuer is required to use to determine the median in-
                network rate described in paragraph (1), the 
                information the plan or issuer shall share with the 
                out-of-network provider involved when making such a 
                determination, and the geographic regions applied for 
                purposes of this subsection. Such rulemaking shall take 
                into account payments that are made by issuers that are 
                not on a fee-for-service basis.
                    ``(B) Geographic regions.--In establishing 
                geographic regions as described in subparagraph (A), 
                the Secretary shall consider adequate access to 
                services in rural areas. The Secretary shall consult 
                with the National Association of Insurance 
                Commissioners in establishing the geographic regions. 
                The Secretary shall update the geographic regions 
                periodically, as appropriate, taking into account the 
                findings of the report under section 106 of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act.
            ``(3) Certain insurers.--If a group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage does not have sufficient information to calculate a 
        median in-network rate for this service or provider type, or 
        amount of, claims for services (as determined by the applicable 
        State authority, in the case of health insurance coverage, or 
        by the Secretary of Labor, in the case of a self-insured group 
        health plan) covered under the list of out-of-network services 
        set by the State authority or Secretary of Labor, as 
        applicable, in a particular geographic area, such plan or 
        issuer shall demonstrate that it will use a database free of 
        conflicts of interest that has sufficient information 
        reflecting allowed amounts paid to individual health care 
        providers for relevant services provided in the applicable 
        geographic region, and that such plan or issuer will use that 
        database to determine a median in-network rate. The group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer shall cover the cost of 
        accessing the database.
            ``(4) Clarification.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
        Secretary may define geographic regions that are different from 
        the geographic regions identified for purposes of section 
        2729A(b) to ensure that an adequate number of air ambulance 
        services are in-network in each geographic region so that a 
        median in-network rate for air ambulance services may be 
        calculated for each such region.
    ``(d) Cost-sharing Limitation.--An air ambulance service provider 
may not bill an enrollee in a group health plan or group or individual 
health insurance coverage for amounts beyond the cost-sharing amount 
that applies under subsection (a).
    ``(e) Enforcement.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), an air 
        ambulance service provider that violates subsection (d) shall 
        be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than $10,000 
        for each act constituting such violation.
            ``(2) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A of the 
        Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the 
        first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall 
        apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in the 
        same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
        under section 1128A of the Social Security Act.
            ``(3) Safe harbor.--The Secretary shall waive the penalties 
        described under paragraph (1) with respect to a air ambulance 
        service provider who unknowingly violates subsection (d) with 
        respect to an enrollee, if such air ambulance service provider 
        within 30 days of the violation, withdraws the bill that was in 
        violation of subsection (d), and, as applicable, reimburses the 
        group health plan, health insurance issuer, or enrollee, as 
        applicable, in an amount equal to the amount billed in 
        violation of subsection (d), plus interest, at an interest rate 
        determined by the Secretary.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2719B of the Public Health Service 
Act, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect on the date that is 
1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 106. REPORT.

    Not later than 1 year after the effective date described in section 
104, and annually for the following 4 years, the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services, in consultation with the Federal Trade Commission 
and the Attorney General, shall--
            (1) conduct a study on--
                    (A) the effects of the amendments made by sections 
                101, 102, 103, and 105, including any patterns of 
                vertical or horizontal integration of health care 
                facilities, providers, group health plans, or health 
                insurance issuers;
                    (B) the effects of the amendments made by sections 
                101, 102, 103, and 105 on overall health care costs;
                    (C) the effects of the amendments made by sections 
                101, 102, 103, and 105 on access to services, including 
                specialty services, in rural areas and health 
                professional shortage areas as defined in section 332; 
                and
                    (D) recommendations, made in consultation with the 
                Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of the Treasury, 
                for effective enforcement of 2729A of the Public Health 
                Service Act, as added by section 103, including 
                potential challenges to addressing anti-competitive 
                consolidation by health care facilities, providers, 
                group health plans, or health insurance issuers; and
            (2) submit a report on such study to the Committee on 
        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, the Committee on 
        Commerce, Science, and Transportation, the Committee on 
        Finance, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and 
        the Committee on Education and Labor, the Committee on Energy 
        and Commerce, the Committee on Ways and Means, and the 
        Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives.

          TITLE II--REDUCING THE PRICES OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS

SEC. 201. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCT PATENT TRANSPARENCY.

    (a) In General.--Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 262) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(o) Additional Requirements With Respect to Patents.--
            ``(1) Approved application holder listing requirements.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Beginning on the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, within 60 
                days of approval of an application under subsection (a) 
                or (k), the holder of such approved application shall 
                submit to the Secretary a list of each patent required 
                to be disclosed (as described in paragraph (3)).
                    ``(B) Previously approved or licensed biological 
                products.--
                            ``(i) Products licensed under section 351 
                        of the phsa.--Not later than 30 days after the 
                        date of enactment of the Lower Health Care 
                        Costs Act, the holder of a biological product 
                        license that was approved under subsection (a) 
                        or (k) before the date of enactment of such Act 
                        shall submit to the Secretary a list of each 
                        patent required to be disclosed (as described 
                        in paragraph (3)).
                            ``(ii) Products approved under section 505 
                        of the ffdca.--Not later than 30 days after 
                        March 23, 2020, the holder of an approved 
                        application for a biological product under 
                        section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
                        Cosmetic Act that is deemed to be a license for 
                        the biological product under this section on 
                        March 23, 2020, shall submit to the Secretary a 
                        list of each patent required to be disclosed 
                        (as described in paragraph (3)).
                    ``(C) Updates.--The holder of a biological product 
                license that is the subject of an application under 
                subsection (a) or (k) shall submit to the Secretary a 
                list that includes--
                            ``(i) any patent not previously required to 
                        be disclosed (as described in paragraph (3)) 
                        under subparagraph (A) or (B), as applicable, 
                        within 30 days of the earlier of--
                                    ``(I) the date of issuance of such 
                                patent by the United States Patent and 
                                Trademark Office; or
                                    ``(II) the date of approval of a 
                                supplemental application for the 
                                biological product; and
                            ``(ii) any patent, or any claim with 
                        respect to a patent, included on the list 
                        pursuant to this paragraph, that the Patent 
                        Trial and Appeal Board of the United States 
                        Patent and Trademark Office determines in a 
                        written decision to cancel as unpatentable, 
                        within 30 days of such decision.
            ``(2) Publication of information.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Within 1 year of the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the 
                Secretary shall publish and make available to the 
                public a single, easily searchable list that includes--
                            ``(i) the official and proprietary name of 
                        each biological product licensed, or deemed to 
                        be licensed, under subsection (a) or (k);
                            ``(ii) with respect to each biological 
                        product described in clause (i), each patent 
                        submitted in accordance with paragraph (1);
                            ``(iii) the date of licensure and 
                        application number for each such biological 
                        product;
                            ``(iv) the marketing status, dosage form, 
                        route of administration, strength, and, if 
                        applicable, reference product, for each such 
                        biological product;
                            ``(v) the licensure status for each such 
                        biological product, including whether the 
                        license at the time of listing is approved, 
                        withdrawn, or revoked;
                            ``(vi) with respect to each such biological 
                        product, any period of exclusivity under 
                        paragraph (6), (7)(A), or (7)(B) of subsection 
                        (k) of this section or section 527 of the 
                        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and any 
                        extension of such period in accordance with 
                        subsection (m) of this section, for which the 
                        Secretary has determined such biological 
                        product to be eligible, and the date on which 
                        such exclusivity expires;
                            ``(vii) any determination of biosimilarity 
                        or interchangeability for each such biological 
                        product; and
                            ``(viii) information regarding approved 
                        indications for each such biological product, 
                        in such manner as the Secretary determines 
                        appropriate.
                    ``(B) Updates.--Every 30 days after the publication 
                of the first list under subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
                shall revise the list to include--
                            ``(i)(I) each biological product licensed 
                        under subsection (a) or (k) during the 30-day 
                        period; and
                            ``(II) with respect to each biological 
                        product described in subclause (I), the 
                        information described in clauses (i) through 
                        (viii) of subparagraph (A); and
                            ``(ii) any updates to information 
                        previously published in accordance with 
                        subparagraph (A).
                    ``(C) Noncompliance.--Beginning 18 months after the 
                date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, 
                the Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the 
                United States Patent and Trademark Office, shall 
                publish and make available to the public a list of any 
                holders of biological product licenses, and the 
                corresponding biological product or products, that 
                failed to submit information as required under 
                paragraph (1), including any updates required under 
                paragraph (1)(C), in such manner and format as the 
                Secretary determines appropriate. If information 
                required under paragraph (1) is submitted following 
                publication of such list, the Secretary shall remove 
                such holders of such biological product licenses from 
                the public list in a reasonable period of time.
            ``(3) Patents required to be disclosed.--In this section, a 
        `patent required to be disclosed' is any patent for which the 
        holder of a biological product license approved under 
        subsection (a) or (k), or a biological product application 
        approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
        Cosmetic Act and deemed to be a license for a biological 
        product under this section on March 23, 2020, believes a claim 
        of patent infringement could reasonably be asserted by the 
        holder, or by a patent owner that has granted an exclusive 
        license to the holder with respect to the biological product 
        that is the subject of such license, if a person not licensed 
        by the owner engaged in the making, using, offering to sell, 
        selling, or importing into the United States of the biological 
        product that is the subject of such license.''.
    (b) Disclosure of Patents.--Section 351(l)(3)(A)(i) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(l)(3)(A)(i)) is amended by inserting 
``included in the list provided by the reference product sponsor under 
subsection (o)(1)'' after ``a list of patents''.
    (c) Review and Report on Noncompliance.--Not later than 30 months 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
            (1) solicit public comments regarding appropriate remedies, 
        in addition to the publication of the list under subsection 
        (o)(2)(C) of section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
        U.S.C. 262), as added by subsection (a), with respect to 
        holders of biological product licenses who fail to timely 
        submit information as required under subsection (o)(1) of such 
        section 351, including any updates required under subparagraph 
        (C) of such subsection (o)(1); and
            (2) submit to Congress an evaluation of comments received 
        under paragraph (1) and the recommendations of the Secretary 
        concerning appropriate remedies.
    (d) Regulations.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may 
promulgate regulations to carry out subsection (o) of section 351 of 
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as added by subsection 
(a).
    (e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act, including an 
amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to require or allow the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services to delay the licensing of a 
biological product under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262).

SEC. 202. ORANGE BOOK MODERNIZATION.

    (a) Submission of Patent Information for Brand Name Drugs.--
            (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 505(b) of the 
        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)) is 
        amended to read as follows:
    ``(b)(1)(A) Any person may file with the Secretary an application 
with respect to any drug subject to the provisions of subsection (a). 
Such persons shall submit to the Secretary as part of the application--
            ``(i) full reports of investigations which have been made 
        to show whether or not such drug is safe for use and whether 
        such drug is effective in use;
            ``(ii) a full list of the articles used as components of 
        such drug;
            ``(iii) a full statement of the composition of such drug;
            ``(iv) a full description of the methods used in, and the 
        facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, processing, 
        and packing of such drug;
            ``(v) such samples of such drug and of the articles used as 
        components thereof as the Secretary may require;
            ``(vi) specimens of the labeling proposed to be used for 
        such drug;
            ``(vii) any assessments required under section 505B; and
            ``(viii) the patent number and expiration date, of each 
        patent for which a claim of patent infringement could 
        reasonably be asserted if a person not licensed by the owner 
        engaged in the manufacture, use, or sale of the drug, and 
        that--
                    ``(I) claims the drug for which the applicant 
                submitted the application and is a drug substance 
                patent or a drug product patent; or
                    ``(II) claims the method of using the drug for 
                which approval is sought or has been granted in the 
                application.
    ``(B) If an application is filed under this subsection for a drug, 
and a patent of the type described in subparagraph (A)(viii) that 
claims such drug or a method of using such drug is issued after the 
filing date, the applicant shall amend the application to include such 
patent information.''.
            (2) Guidance.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        shall, in consultation with the Director of the National 
        Institutes of Health and with representatives of the drug 
        manufacturing industry, review and develop guidance, as 
        appropriate, on the inclusion of women and minorities in 
        clinical trials required under subsection (b)(1)(A)(i) of 
        section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
        U.S.C. 355), as amended by paragraph (1).
    (b) Conforming Changes to Requirements for Subsequent Submission of 
Patent Information.--Section 505(c)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(c)(2)) is amended--
            (1) by inserting before the first sentence the following: 
        ``Not later than 30 days after the date of approval of an 
        application under subsection (b), the holder of the approved 
        application shall file with the Secretary the patent number and 
        the expiration date of any patent described in subclause (I) or 
        (II) of subsection (b)(1)(A)(viii), except that a patent that 
        is identified as claiming a method of using such drug shall be 
        filed only if the patent claims a method of use approved in the 
        application. The holder of the approved application shall file 
        with the Secretary the patent number and the expiration date of 
        any patent described in subclause (I) or (II) of subsection 
        (b)(1)(A)(viii) that is issued after the date of approval of 
        the application, not later than 30 days after the date of 
        issuance of the patent, except that a patent that claims a 
        method of using such drug shall be filed only if approval for 
        such use has been granted in the application.'';
            (2) by inserting after ``the patent number and the 
        expiration date of any patent which'' the following: ``fulfills 
        the criteria in subsection (b) and'';
            (3) by inserting after the third sentence (as amended by 
        paragraph (1)) the following: ``Patent information that is not 
        the type of patent information required by subsection 
        (b)(1)(A)(viii) shall not be submitted under this paragraph.''; 
        and
            (4) by inserting after ``could not file patent information 
        under subsection (b) because no patent'' the following: ``of 
        the type required to be submitted in subsection 
        (b)(1)(A)(viii)''.
    (c) Listing of Exclusivities.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
505(j)(7) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
355(j)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(iv) For each drug included on the list, the Secretary shall 
specify any exclusivity period that is applicable, for which the 
Secretary has determined the expiration date, and for which such period 
has not yet expired under--
            ``(I) clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of subsection (c)(3)(E) 
        of this section;
            ``(II) clause (iv) or (v) of paragraph (5)(B) of this 
        subsection;
            ``(III) clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of paragraph (5)(F) of 
        this subsection;
            ``(IV) section 505A;
            ``(V) section 505E;
            ``(VI) section 527(a); or
            ``(VII) subsection (u)''.
    (d) Orange Book Updates With Respect to Invalidated Patents.--
            (1) In general.--
                    (A) Amendments.--Section 505(j)(7)(A) of the 
                Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
                355(j)(7)(A)), as amended by subsection (c), is further 
                amended by adding at the end the following:
            ``(v) In the case of a listed drug for which the list under 
        clause (i) includes a patent for such drug, and where the Under 
        Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property and Director of 
        the United States Patent and Trademark Office have cancelled 
        any claim of the patent pursuant to a decision by the Patent 
        Trial and Appeal Board in an inter partes review conducted 
        under chapter 31 of title 35, United States Code, or a post-
        grant review conducted under chapter 32 of that title, and from 
        which no appeal has been taken, or can be taken, the holder of 
        the applicable approved application shall notify the Secretary, 
        in writing, within 14 days of such cancellation, and, if the 
        patent has been deemed wholly inoperative or invalid, or if a 
        patent claim has been cancelled, the revisions required under 
        clause (iii) shall include striking the patent or information 
        regarding such patent claim from the list with respect to such 
        drug, as applicable, except that the Secretary shall not remove 
        a patent from the list before the expiration of any 180-day 
        exclusivity period under paragraph (5)(B)(iv) that relies on a 
        certification described in paragraph (2)(A)(vii)(IV) with 
        respect to such patent.''.
                    (B) Application.--The amendment made by 
                subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to any 
                determination with respect to a patent or patent claim 
                that is made prior to the date of enactment of this 
                Act.
            (2) No effect on first applicant exclusivity period.--
        Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I), as amended by section 205, is 
        amended by adding at the end the following: ``This subclause 
        shall apply even if a patent is stricken from the list under 
        paragraph (7)(A), pursuant to paragraph (7)(A)(v), provided 
        that, at the time that the first applicant submitted an 
        application under this subsection containing a certification 
        described in paragraph (2)(A)(vii)(IV), the patent that was the 
        subject of such certification was included in such list with 
        respect to the listed drug.''.

SEC. 203. ENSURING TIMELY ACCESS TO GENERICS.

    Section 505(q) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 355(q)) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (1)--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by inserting ``, 
                10.31,'' after ``10.30'';
                    (B) in subparagraph (E)--
                            (i) by striking ``application and'' and 
                        inserting ``application or'';
                            (ii) by striking ``If the Secretary'' and 
                        inserting the following:
                            ``(i) In general.--If the Secretary''; and
                            (iii) by striking the second sentence and 
                        inserting the following:
                            ``(ii) Primary purpose of delaying.--
                                    ``(I) In general.--In determining 
                                whether a petition was submitted with 
                                the primary purpose of delaying an 
                                application, the Secretary may consider 
                                the following factors:
                                            ``(aa) Whether the petition 
                                        was submitted in accordance 
                                        with paragraph (2)(B), based on 
                                        when the petitioner knew or 
                                        reasonably should have known 
                                        the relevant information relied 
                                        upon to form the basis of such 
                                        petition.
                                            ``(bb) Whether the 
                                        petitioner has submitted 
                                        multiple or serial petitions or 
                                        supplements to petitions 
                                        raising issues that reasonably 
                                        could have been known to the 
                                        petitioner at the time of 
                                        submission of the earlier 
                                        petition or petitions.
                                            ``(cc) Whether the petition 
                                        was submitted close in time to 
                                        a known, first date upon which 
                                        an application under subsection 
                                        (b)(2) or (j) of this section 
                                        or section 351(k) of the Public 
                                        Health Service Act could be 
                                        approved.
                                            ``(dd) Whether the petition 
                                        was submitted without relevant 
                                        data or information in support 
                                        of the scientific positions 
                                        forming the basis of such 
                                        petition.
                                            ``(ee) Whether the petition 
                                        raises the same or 
                                        substantially similar issues as 
                                        a prior petition to which the 
                                        Secretary has responded 
                                        substantively already, 
                                        including if the subsequent 
                                        submission follows such 
                                        response from the Secretary 
                                        closely in time.
                                            ``(ff) Whether the petition 
                                        requests changing the 
                                        applicable standards that other 
                                        applicants are required to 
                                        meet, including requesting 
                                        testing, data, or labeling 
                                        standards that are more onerous 
                                        or rigorous than the standards 
                                        the Secretary has determined to 
                                        be applicable to the listed 
                                        drug, reference product, or 
                                        petitioner's version of the 
                                        same drug.
                                            ``(gg) The petitioner's 
                                        record of submitting petitions 
                                        to the Food and Drug 
                                        Administration that have been 
                                        determined by the Secretary to 
                                        have been submitted with the 
                                        primary purpose of delay.
                                            ``(hh) Other relevant and 
                                        appropriate factors, which the 
                                        Secretary shall describe in 
                                        guidance.
                                    ``(II) Guidance.--The Secretary may 
                                issue or update guidance, as 
                                appropriate, to describe factors the 
                                Secretary considers in accordance with 
                                subclause (II).'';
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
                            ``(iii) Referral to the federal trade 
                        commission.--The Secretary shall establish 
                        procedures for referring to the Federal Trade 
                        Commission any petition or supplement to a 
                        petition that the Secretary determines was 
                        submitted with the primary purpose of delaying 
                        approval of an application. Such procedures 
                        shall include notification to the petitioner by 
                        the Secretary.'';
                    (D) by striking subparagraph (F);
                    (E) by redesignating subparagraphs (G) through (I) 
                as subparagraphs (F) through (H), respectively; and
                    (F) in subparagraph (H), as so redesignated, by 
                striking ``submission of this petition'' and inserting 
                ``submission of this document'';
            (2) in paragraph (2)--
                    (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (C) 
                as subparagraphs (C) through (E), respectively;
                    (B) by inserting before subparagraph (C), as so 
                redesignated, the following:
                    ``(A) In general.--A person shall submit a petition 
                to the Secretary under paragraph (1) before filing a 
                civil action in which the person seeks to set aside, 
                delay, rescind, withdraw, or prevent submission, 
                review, or approval of an application submitted under 
                subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section or section 
                351(k) of the Public Health Service Act. Such petition 
                and any supplement to such a petition shall describe 
                all information and arguments that form the basis of 
                the relief requested in any civil action described in 
                the previous sentence.
                    ``(B) Timely submission of citizen petition.--A 
                petition and any supplement to a petition shall be 
                submitted within 60 days after the person knew, or 
                reasonably should have known, the information that 
                forms the basis of the request made in the petition or 
                supplement.'';
                    (C) in subparagraph (C), as so redesignated--
                            (i) in the heading, by striking ``within 
                        150 days'';
                            (ii) in clause (i), by striking ``during 
                        the 150-day period referred to in paragraph 
                        (1)(F),''; and
                            (iii) by amending clause (ii) to read as 
                        follows:
                            ``(ii) on or after the date that is 151 
                        days after the date of submission of the 
                        petition, the Secretary approves or has 
                        approved the application that is the subject of 
                        the petition without having made such a final 
                        decision.'';
                    (D) by amending subparagraph (D), as so 
                redesignated, to read as follows:
                    ``(D) Dismissal of certain civil actions.--
                            ``(i) Petition.--If a person files a civil 
                        action against the Secretary in which a person 
                        seeks to set aside, delay, rescind, withdraw, 
                        or prevent submission, review, or approval of 
                        an application submitted under subsection 
                        (b)(2) or (j) of this section or section 351(k) 
                        of the Public Health Service Act without 
                        complying with the requirements of subparagraph 
                        (A), the court shall dismiss without prejudice 
                        the action for failure to exhaust 
                        administrative remedies.
                            ``(ii) Timeliness.--If a person files a 
                        civil action against the Secretary in which a 
                        person seeks to set aside, delay, rescind, 
                        withdraw, or prevent submission, review, or 
                        approval of an application submitted under 
                        subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section or 
                        section 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act 
                        without complying with the requirements of 
                        subparagraph (B), the court shall dismiss with 
                        prejudice the action for failure to timely file 
                        a petition.
                            ``(iii) Final response.--If a civil action 
                        is filed against the Secretary with respect to 
                        any issue raised in a petition timely filed 
                        under paragraph (1) in which the petitioner 
                        requests that the Secretary take any form of 
                        action that could, if taken, set aside, delay, 
                        rescind, withdraw, or prevent submission, 
                        review, or approval of an application submitted 
                        under subsection (b)(2) or (j) of this section 
                        or section 351(k) of the Public Health Service 
                        Act before the Secretary has taken final agency 
                        action on the petition within the meaning of 
                        subparagraph (C), the court shall dismiss 
                        without prejudice the action for failure to 
                        exhaust administrative remedies.''; and
                    (E) in clause (iii) of subparagraph (E), as so 
                redesignated, by striking ``as defined under 
                subparagraph (2)(A)'' and inserting ``within the 
                meaning of subparagraph (C)''; and
            (3) in paragraph (4)--
                    (A) by striking ``Exceptions'' and all that follows 
                through ``This subsection does'' and inserting 
                ``Exceptions.--This subsection does'';
                    (B) by striking subparagraph (B); and
                    (C) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) as 
                subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and adjusting 
                the margins accordingly.

SEC. 204. PROTECTING ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

    Section 351(k)(7) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
262(k)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(D) Deemed licenses.--
                            ``(i) No additional exclusivity through 
                        deeming.--An approved application that is 
                        deemed to be a license for a biological product 
                        under this section pursuant to section 
                        7002(e)(4) of the Biologics Price Competition 
                        and Innovation Act of 2009 shall not be treated 
                        as having been first licensed under subsection 
                        (a) for purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B).
                            ``(ii) Application of limitations on 
                        exclusivity.--Subparagraph (C) shall apply with 
                        respect to a reference product referred to in 
                        such subparagraph that was the subject of an 
                        approved application that was deemed to be a 
                        license pursuant to section 7002(e)(4) of the 
                        Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act 
                        of 2009.
                            ``(iii) Applicability.--The exclusivity 
                        periods described in section 527, section 
                        505A(b)(1)(A)(ii), and section 
                        505A(c)(1)(A)(ii) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
                        and Cosmetic Act shall continue to apply to a 
                        biological product after an approved 
                        application for the biological product is 
                        deemed to be a license for the biological 
                        product under subsection (a) pursuant to 
                        section 7002(e)(4) of the Biologics Price 
                        Competition and Innovation Act of 2009.''.

SEC. 205. PREVENTING BLOCKING OF GENERIC DRUGS.

    (a) In General.--Section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I) of the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I)) is amended--
            (1) by striking ``180 days after the date'' and inserting 
        ``180 days after the earlier of the following:
                            ``(aa) The date''; and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:
                            ``(bb) The date on which all of the 
                        following conditions are first met, provided no 
                        application submitted by any first applicant is 
                        approved on or before such date:
                                    ``(AA) An application for the drug 
                                submitted by an applicant other than a 
                                first applicant has received tentative 
                                approval and could receive approval, if 
                                no first applicant were eligible for 
                                180-day exclusivity under this clause, 
                                and such applicant has not entered into 
                                an agreement that would prevent 
                                commercial marketing upon approval and 
                                has submitted a notification to the 
                                Secretary documenting that it has not 
                                entered into an agreement that would 
                                prevent commercial marketing.
                                    ``(BB) Thirty-three months have 
                                passed since the date of submission of 
                                an application for the drug by one 
                                first applicant, if there is only one 
                                first applicant, or, in the case of 
                                more than one first applicant, 33 
                                months have passed since the date of 
                                submission of all such applications.
                                    ``(CC) Approval of an application 
                                for the drug submitted by at least one 
                                first applicant would not be precluded 
                                under clause (iii).''.
    (b) Information.--Not later than 60 days of the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in 
this subsection as the ``Secretary'') shall publish, as appropriate and 
available, information sufficient to allow applicants to assess whether 
the conditions described in subitems (AA) through (CC) of section 
505(j)(5)(B)(iv)(I)(bb) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as 
amended by subsection (a)) have been or will be satisfied for all 
applications where the exclusivity period under (iv)(I) of section 
505(j)(5)(B) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as so 
amended) has not expired, and shall provide updates to reflect the most 
recent information available to the Secretary.

SEC. 206. EDUCATION ON BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

    Subpart 1 of part F of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 262 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 352A. EDUCATION ON BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

    ``(a) Internet Website.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may maintain and operate 
        an internet website to provide educational materials for health 
        care providers, patients, and caregivers, regarding the meaning 
        of the terms, and the standards for review and licensing of, 
        biological products, including biosimilar biological products 
        and interchangeable biosimilar biological products.
            ``(2) Content.--Educational materials provided under 
        paragraph (1) may include--
                    ``(A) explanations of key statutory and regulatory 
                terms, including `biosimilar' and `interchangeable', 
                and clarification regarding the use of interchangeable 
                biosimilar biological products;
                    ``(B) information related to development programs 
                for biological products, including biosimilar 
                biological products and interchangeable biosimilar 
                biological products and relevant clinical 
                considerations for prescribers, which may include, as 
                appropriate and applicable, information related to the 
                comparability of such biological products;
                    ``(C) an explanation of the process for reporting 
                adverse events for biological products, including 
                biosimilar biological products and interchangeable 
                biosimilar biological products; and
                    ``(D) an explanation of the relationship between 
                biosimilar biological products and interchangeable 
                biosimilar biological products licensed under section 
                351(k) and reference products (as defined in section 
                351(i)), including the standards for review and 
                licensing of each such type of biological product.
            ``(3) Format.--The educational materials provided under 
        paragraph (1) may be--
                    ``(A) in formats such as webinars, continuing 
                medical education modules, videos, fact sheets, 
                infographics, stakeholder toolkits, or other formats as 
                appropriate and applicable; and
                    ``(B) tailored for the unique needs of health care 
                providers, patients, caregivers, and other audiences, 
                as the Secretary determines appropriate.
            ``(4) Other information.--In addition to the information 
        described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall continue to 
        publish the following information:
                    ``(A) The action package of each biological product 
                licensed under subsection (a) or (k).
                    ``(B) The summary review of each biological product 
                licensed under subsection (a) or (k).
            ``(5) Confidential and trade secret information.--This 
        subsection does not authorize the disclosure of any trade 
        secret, confidential commercial or financial information, or 
        other matter described in section 552(b) of title 5.
    ``(b) Continuing Education.--The Secretary shall advance education 
and awareness among health care providers regarding biological 
products, including biosimilar biological products and interchangeable 
biosimilar biological products, as appropriate, including by developing 
or improving continuing medical education programs that advance the 
education of such providers on the prescribing of, and relevant 
clinical considerations with respect to, biological products, including 
biosimilar biological products and interchangeable biosimilar 
biological products.''.

SEC. 207. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCT INNOVATION.

    Section 351(j) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(j)) 
is amended--
            (1) by striking ``except that a product'' and inserting 
        ``except that--
            ``(1) a product'';
            (2) by striking ``Act.'' and inserting ``Act; and''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(2) no requirement under such Act regarding an official 
        compendium (as defined in section 201(j) of such Act), or other 
        reference in such Act to an official compendium (as so 
        defined), shall apply with respect to a biological product 
        subject to regulation under this section.''.

SEC. 208. CLARIFYING THE MEANING OF NEW CHEMICAL ENTITY.

    (a) In General.--Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act is amended--
            (1) in section 505 (21 U.S.C. 355)--
                    (A) in subsection (c)(3)(E), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' each place it appears and inserting 
                ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 
                314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                successor regulations))'';
                    (B) in subsection (j)(5)(F), by striking ``active 
                ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active 
                ingredient)'' each place it appears and inserting 
                ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 
                314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                successor regulations))'';
                    (C) in subsection (l)(2)(A)--
                            (i) by amending clause (i) to read as 
                        follows:
                    ``(i) not later than 30 days after the date of 
                approval of such applications--
                            ``(I) for a drug, no active moiety (as 
                        defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                        title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                        successor regulations)) of which has been 
                        approved in any other application under this 
                        section; or
                            ``(II) for a biological product, no active 
                        ingredient of which has been approved in any 
                        other application under section 351 of the 
                        Public Health Service Act; and''; and
                            (ii) in clause (ii), by inserting "or 
                        biological product" before the period;
                    (D) by amending subsection (s) to read as follows:
    ``(s) Referral to Advisory Committee.--The Secretary shall--
            ``(1) refer a drug or biological product to a Food and Drug 
        Administration advisory committee for review at a meeting of 
        such advisory committee prior to the approval of such drug or 
        biological if it is--
                    ``(A) a drug, no active moiety (as defined by the 
                Secretary in section 314.3 of title 21, Code of Federal 
                Regulations (or any successor regulations)) of which 
                has been approved in any other application under this 
                section; or
                    ``(B) a biological product, no active ingredient of 
                which has been approved in any other application under 
                section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; or
            ``(2) if the Secretary does not refer a drug or biological 
        product described in paragraph (1) to a Food and Drug 
        Administration advisory committee prior to such approval, 
        provide in the action letter on the application for the drug or 
        biological product a summary of the reasons why the Secretary 
        did not refer the drug or biological product to an advisory 
        committee prior to approval.''; and
                    (E) in subsection (u)(1), in the matter preceding 
                subparagraph (A)--
                            (i) by striking ``active ingredient 
                        (including any ester or salt of the active 
                        ingredient)'' and inserting ``active moiety (as 
                        defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                        title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                        successor regulations))''; and
                            (ii) by striking ``same active ingredient'' 
                        and inserting ``same active moiety'';
            (2) in section 512(c)(2)(F) (21 U.S.C. 360b(c)(2)(F)), by 
        striking ``active ingredient (including any ester or salt of 
        the active ingredient)'' each place it appears and inserting 
        ``active moiety (as defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 
        of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
        regulations))'';
            (3) in section 524(a)(4) (21 U.S.C. 360n(a)(4)), by 
        amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows:
                    ``(C) is for--
                            ``(i) a human drug, no active moiety (as 
                        defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                        title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                        successor regulations)) of which has been 
                        approved in any other application under section 
                        505(b)(1); or
                            ``(ii) a biological product, no active 
                        ingredient of which has been approved in any 
                        other application under section 351 of the 
                        Public Health Service Act.'';
            (4) in section 529(a)(4) (21 U.S.C. 21 U.S.C. 360ff(a)(4)), 
        by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting the 
        following:
                    ``(A) is for a drug or biological product that is 
                for the prevention or treatment of a rare pediatric 
                disease;
                    ``(B)(i) is for such a drug--
                            ``(I) that contains no active moiety (as 
                        defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                        title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                        successor regulations)) that has been 
                        previously approved in any other application 
                        under subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (j) of 
                        section 505; and
                            ``(II) that is the subject of an 
                        application submitted under section 505(b)(1); 
                        or
                    ``(ii) or is for such a biological product--
                            ``(I) that contains no active ingredient 
                        that has been previously approved in any other 
                        application under section 351(a) or 351(k) of 
                        the Public Health Service Act; and
                            ``(II) that is the subject of an 
                        application submitted under section 351(a) of 
                        the Public Health Service Act;''; and
            (5) in section 565A(a)(4) (21 U.S.C. 360bbb-4a(a)(4)), by 
        amending subparagraph (D) to read as follows:
                    ``(D) is for--
                            ``(i) a human drug, no active moiety (as 
                        defined by the Secretary in section 314.3 of 
                        title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
                        successor regulations)) of which has been 
                        approved in any other application under section 
                        505(b)(1); or
                            ``(ii) a biological product, no active 
                        ingredient of which has been approved in any 
                        other application under section 351 of the 
                        Public Health Service Act.''.
    (b) Technical Corrections.--Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 351 et seq) is amended--
            (1) in section 505 (21 U.S.C. 355)--
                    (A) in subsection (c)(3)(E), by repealing clause 
                (i); and
                    (B) in subsection (j)(5)(F), by repealing clause 
                (i); and
            (2) in section 505A(c)(1)(A)(i)(II) (21 U.S.C. 
        355a(c)(1)(A)(i)), by striking ``(c)(3)(D)'' and inserting 
        ``(c)(3)(E)''.

SEC. 209. STREAMLINING THE TRANSITION OF BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

    Section 7002(e)(4) of the Biologics Price Competition and 
Innovation Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-148) is amended by adding at the 
end the following: ``With respect to an application for a biological 
product submitted under section 505(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355(b)) with a filing date that is not later 
than September 23, 2019, and that does not receive final approval on or 
before March 23, 2020, such application shall be deemed to be withdrawn 
and the Secretary shall refund the fee paid under section 736(a)(1)(B) 
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 379h(a)(1)(B)). 
Notwithstanding any such withdrawal of the drug application, the 
Secretary shall consider any previously conducted scientific review and 
accelerate review of any such subsequent application with respect to 
such biological product under section 351 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 262). The Secretary shall provide additional assistance 
to the sponsor or manufacturer of such application.''.

SEC. 210. ORPHAN DRUG CLARIFICATION.

    Section 527(c) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 360cc(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
            ``(3) Applicability.--This subsection applies to any drug 
        designated under section 526 for which an application was 
        approved under section 505 of this Act or licensed under 
        section 351 of the Public Health Service Act after the date of 
        enactment of the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, regardless of 
        the date of on which such drug was designated under section 
        526.''.

SEC. 211. PROMPT APPROVAL OF DRUGS RELATED TO SAFETY INFORMATION.

    Section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
355) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(z) Prompt Approval of Drugs When Safety Information Is Added to 
Labeling.--
            ``(1) General rule.--A drug for which an application has 
        been submitted or approved under subsection (b)(2) or (j) shall 
        not be considered ineligible for approval under this section or 
        misbranded under section 502 on the basis that the labeling of 
        the drug omits safety information, including contraindications, 
        warnings, precautions, dosing, administration, or other 
        information pertaining to safety, when the omitted safety 
        information is protected by exclusivity under clause (iii) or 
        (iv) of subsection (j)(5)(F), clause (iii) or (iv) of 
        subsection (c)(3)(E), or section 527(a), or by an extension of 
        such exclusivity under section 505A or 505E.
            ``(2) Labeling.--Notwithstanding clauses (iii) and (iv) of 
        subsection (j)(5)(F), clauses (iii) and (iv) of subsection 
        (c)(3)(E), or section 527, the Secretary shall require that the 
        labeling of a drug approved pursuant to an application 
        submitted under subsection (b)(2) or (j) that omits safety 
        information described in paragraph (1) include a statement of 
        any appropriate safety information that the Secretary considers 
        necessary to assure safe use.
            ``(3) Availability and scope of exclusivity.--This 
        subsection does not affect--
                    ``(A) the availability or scope of exclusivity or 
                an extension of exclusivity described in subparagraph 
                (A) or (B) of section 505A(o)(3);
                    ``(B) the question of the eligibility for approval 
                under this section of any application described in 
                subsection (b)(2) or (j) that omits any other aspect of 
                labeling protected by exclusivity under--
                            ``(i) clause (iii) or (iv) of subsection 
                        (j)(5)(F);
                            ``(ii) clause (iii) or (iv) of subsection 
                        (c)(3)(E); or
                            ``(iii) section 527(a); or
                    ``(C) except as expressly provided in paragraphs 
                (1) and (2), the operation of this section or section 
                527.''.

SEC. 212. CONDITIONS OF USE FOR BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.

    Section 351(k)(2)(A)(iii) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 262(k)(2)(A)(iii) is amended--
            (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
        semicolon;
            (2) in subclause (II), by striking the period and inserting 
        ``; and''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
                                    ``(III) may include information to 
                                show that the conditions of use 
                                prescribed, recommended, or suggested 
                                in the labeling proposed for the 
                                biological product have been previously 
                                approved for the reference product.''.

SEC. 213. MODERNIZING THE LABELING OF CERTAIN GENERIC DRUGS.

    Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
351 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 503C the following:

``SEC. 503D. PROCESS TO UPDATE LABELING FOR CERTAIN DRUGS.

    ``(a) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
            ``(1) The term `covered drug' means a drug approved under 
        section 505(c)--
                    ``(A) for which there are no unexpired patents 
                included in the list under section 505(j)(7) and no 
                unexpired period of exclusivity;
                    ``(B) for which the approval of the application has 
                been withdrawn for reasons other than safety or 
                effectiveness; and
                    ``(C) for which, with respect to the labeling--
                            ``(i) new scientific evidence is available 
                        regarding the conditions of use of the drug;
                            ``(ii) there is a relevant accepted use in 
                        clinical practice that is not reflected in the 
                        approved labeling; or
                            ``(iii) the labeling of such drug does not 
                        reflect current legal and regulatory 
                        requirements.
            ``(2) The term `period of exclusivity', with respect to a 
        drug approved under section 505(c), means any period of 
        exclusivity under clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of section 
        505(c)(3)(E), clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of section 
        505(j)(5)(F), or section 505A, 505E, or 527.
            ``(3) The term `generic version' means a drug approved 
        under section 505(j) whose reference drug is a covered drug.
            ``(4) The term `relevant accepted use' means a use for a 
        drug in clinical practice that is supported by scientific 
        evidence that appears to the Secretary to meet the standards 
        for approval under section 505.
            ``(5) The term `selected drug' means a covered drug for 
        which the Secretary has determined through the process under 
        subsection (c) that the labeling should be changed.
    ``(b) Identification of Covered Drugs.--The Secretary may identify 
covered drugs for which labeling updates would provide a public health 
benefit. To assist in identifying covered drugs, the Secretary may do 
one or both of the following:
            ``(1) Enter into cooperative agreements or contracts with 
        public or private entities to review the available scientific 
        evidence concerning such drugs.
            ``(2) Seek public input concerning such drugs, including 
        input on whether there is a relevant accepted use in clinical 
        practice that is not reflected in the approved labeling of such 
        drugs or whether new scientific evidence is available regarding 
        the conditions of use for such drug, by--
                    ``(A) holding one or more public meetings;
                    ``(B) opening a public docket for the submission of 
                public comments; or
                    ``(C) other means, as the Secretary determines 
                appropriate.
    ``(c) Selection of Drugs for Updating.--If the Secretary 
determines, with respect to a covered drug, that the available 
scientific evidence meets the standards under section 505 for adding or 
modifying information to the labeling or providing supplemental 
information to the labeling regarding the use of the covered drug, the 
Secretary may initiate the process under subsection (d).
    ``(d) Initiation of the Process of Updating.--If the Secretary 
determines that labeling changes are appropriate for a selected drug 
pursuant to subsection (c), the Secretary shall provide notice to the 
holders of approved applications for a generic version of such drug 
that--
            ``(1) summarizes the findings supporting the determination 
        of the Secretary that the available scientific evidence meets 
        the standards under section 505 for adding or modifying 
        information or providing supplemental information to the 
        labeling of the covered drug pursuant to subsection (c);
            ``(2) provides a clear statement regarding the additional, 
        modified, or supplemental information for such labeling, 
        according to the determination by the Secretary (including, as 
        applicable, modifications to add the relevant accepted use to 
        the labeling of the drug as an additional indication for the 
        drug); and
            ``(3) states whether the statement under paragraph (2) 
        applies to the selected drug as a class of covered drugs or 
        only to a specific drug product.
    ``(e) Response to Notification.--Within 30 days of receipt of 
notification provided by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (d), the 
holder of an approved application for a generic version of the selected 
drug shall--
            ``(1) agree to change the approved labeling to reflect the 
        additional, modified, or supplemental information the Secretary 
        has determined to be appropriate; or
            ``(2) notify the Secretary that the holder of the approved 
        application does not believe that the requested labeling 
        changes are warranted and submit a statement detailing the 
        reasons why such changes are not warranted.
    ``(f) Review of Application Holder's Response.--
            ``(1) In general.--Upon receipt of the application holder's 
        response, the Secretary shall promptly review each statement 
        received under subsection (e)(2) and determine which labeling 
        changes pursuant to the Secretary's notice under subsection (d) 
        are appropriate, if any. If the Secretary disagrees with the 
        reasons why such labeling changes are not warranted, the 
        Secretary shall provide opportunity for discussions with the 
        application holders to reach agreement on whether the labeling 
        for the covered drug should be updated to reflect current 
        scientific evidence, and if so, the content of such labeling 
        changes.
            ``(2) Changes to labeling.--After considering all responses 
        from the holder of an approved application under paragraph (1) 
        or (2) of subsection (e), and any discussion under paragraph 
        (1), the Secretary may order such holder to make the labeling 
        changes the Secretary determines are appropriate. Such holder 
        of an approved application shall--
                    ``(A) update its paper labeling for the drug at the 
                next printing of that labeling;
                    ``(B) update any electronic labeling for the drug 
                within 30 days; and
                    ``(C) submit the revised labeling through the form, 
                `Supplement--Changes Being Effected'.
    ``(g) Violation.--If the holder of an approved application for the 
generic version of the selected drug does not comply with the 
requirements of subsection (f)(2), such generic version of the selected 
drug shall be deemed to be misbranded under section 502.
    ``(h) Limitations; Generic Drugs.--
            ``(1) In general.--With respect to any labeling change 
        required under this section, the generic version shall be 
        deemed to have the same conditions of use and the same labeling 
        as a reference drug for purposes of clauses (i) and (v) of 
        section 505(j)(2)(A). Any labeling change so required shall not 
        have any legal effect for the applicant that is different than 
        the legal effect that would have resulted if a supplemental 
        application had been submitted and approved to conform the 
        labeling of the generic version to a change in the labeling of 
        the reference drug.
            ``(2) Supplemental applications.--Changes to labeling made 
        in accordance with this paragraph shall not be eligible for an 
        exclusivity period under this Act.
    ``(i) Drug Product Classes.--In the case of a selected drug for 
which the labeling changes ordered by the Secretary under subsection 
(d)(2) are required for a class of covered drugs, such labeling changes 
shall be made for generic versions of such drug in that class.
    ``(j) Rules of Construction.--
            ``(1) Approval standards.--This section shall not be 
        construed as altering the applicability of the standards for 
        approval of an application under section 505. No order shall be 
        issued under this subsection unless the evidence supporting the 
        changed labeling meets the standards for approval applicable to 
        any change to labeling under section 505.
            ``(2) Removal of information.--Nothing in this section 
        shall be construed to give the Secretary additional authority 
        to remove approved indications for drugs, other than the 
        authority described in this section.
    ``(k) Reports.--Not later than 4 years after the date of the 
enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act and every 4 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, a report that--
            ``(1) describes the actions of the Secretary under this 
        section, including--
                    ``(A) the number of covered drugs and description 
                of the types of drugs the Secretary has selected for 
                labeling changes and the rationale for such recommended 
                changes; and
                    ``(B) the number of times the Secretary entered 
                into discussions concerning a disagreement with an 
                application holder or holders and a summary of the 
                decision regarding a labeling change, if any; and
            ``(2) includes any recommendations of the Secretary for 
        modifying the program under this section.''.

SEC. 214. ACTIONS FOR DELAYS OF GENERIC DRUGS AND BIOSIMILAR BIOLOGICAL 
              PRODUCTS.

    (a) Definitions.--In this section--
            (1) the term ``commercially reasonable, market-based 
        terms'' means--
                    (A) a nondiscriminatory price for the sale of the 
                covered product at or below, but not greater than, the 
                most recent wholesale acquisition cost for the drug, as 
                defined in section 1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social 
                Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-3a(c)(6)(B));
                    (B) a schedule for delivery that results in the 
                transfer of the covered product to the eligible product 
                developer consistent with the timing under subsection 
                (b)(2)(A)(iv); and
                    (C) no additional conditions are imposed on the 
                sale of the covered product;
            (2) the term ``covered product''--
                    (A) means--
                            (i) any drug approved under subsection (c) 
                        or (j) of section 505 of the Federal Food, 
                        Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) or 
                        biological product licensed under subsection 
                        (a) or (k) of section 351 of the Public Health 
                        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262);
                            (ii) any combination of a drug or 
                        biological product described in clause (i); or
                            (iii) when reasonably necessary to support 
                        approval of an application under section 505 of 
                        the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
                        U.S.C. 355), or section 351 of the Public 
                        Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), as 
                        applicable, or otherwise meet the requirements 
                        for approval under either such section, any 
                        product, including any device, that is marketed 
                        or intended for use with such a drug or 
                        biological product; and
                    (B) does not include any drug or biological product 
                that appears on the drug shortage list in effect under 
                section 506E of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
                Act (21 U.S.C. 356e), unless--
                            (i) the drug or biological product has been 
                        on the drug shortage list in effect under such 
                        section 506E continuously for more than 6 
                        months; or
                            (ii) the Secretary determines that 
                        inclusion of the drug or biological product as 
                        a covered product is likely to contribute to 
                        alleviating or preventing a shortage.
            (3) the term ``device'' has the meaning given the term in 
        section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
        U.S.C. 321);
            (4) the term ``eligible product developer'' means a person 
        that seeks to develop a product for approval pursuant to an 
        application for approval under subsection (b)(2) or (j) of 
        section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
        U.S.C. 355) or for licensing pursuant to an application under 
        section 351(k) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
        262(k));
            (5) the term ``license holder'' means the holder of an 
        application approved under subsection (c) or (j) of section 505 
        of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355) or 
        the holder of a license under subsection (a) or (k) of section 
        351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) for a 
        covered product;
            (6) the term ``REMS'' means a risk evaluation and 
        mitigation strategy under section 505-1 of the Federal Food, 
        Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1);
            (7) the term ``REMS with ETASU'' means a REMS that contains 
        elements to assure safe use under section 505-1(f) of the 
        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1(f));
            (8) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services;
            (9) the term ``single, shared system of elements to assure 
        safe use'' means a single, shared system of elements to assure 
        safe use under section 505-1(f) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
        Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1(f)); and
            (10) the term ``sufficient quantities'' means an amount of 
        a covered product that the eligible product developer 
        determines allows it to--
                    (A) conduct testing to support an application 
                under--
                            (i) subsection (b)(2) or (j) of section 505 
                        of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
                        U.S.C. 355); or
                            (ii) section 351(k) of the Public Health 
                        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(k)); and
                    (B) fulfill any regulatory requirements relating to 
                approval of such an application.
    (b) Civil Action for Failure To Provide Sufficient Quantities of a 
Covered Product.--
            (1) In general.--An eligible product developer may bring a 
        civil action against the license holder for a covered product 
        seeking relief under this subsection in an appropriate district 
        court of the United States alleging that the license holder has 
        declined to provide sufficient quantities of the covered 
        product to the eligible product developer on commercially 
        reasonable, market-based terms.
            (2) Elements.--
                    (A) In general.--To prevail in a civil action 
                brought under paragraph (1), an eligible product 
                developer shall prove, by a preponderance of the 
                evidence--
                            (i) that--
                                    (I) the covered product is not 
                                subject to a REMS with ETASU; or
                                    (II) if the covered product is 
                                subject to a REMS with ETASU--
                                            (aa) the eligible product 
                                        developer has obtained a 
                                        covered product authorization 
                                        from the Secretary in 
                                        accordance with subparagraph 
                                        (B); and
                                            (bb) the eligible product 
                                        developer has provided a copy 
                                        of the covered product 
                                        authorization to the license 
                                        holder;
                            (ii) that, as of the date on which the 
                        civil action is filed, the product developer 
                        has not obtained sufficient quantities of the 
                        covered product on commercially reasonable, 
                        market-based terms;
                            (iii) that the eligible product developer 
                        has submitted a written request to purchase 
                        sufficient quantities of the covered product to 
                        the license holder, and such request--
                                    (I) was sent to a named corporate 
                                officer of the license holder;
                                    (II) was made by certified or 
                                registered mail with return receipt 
                                requested;
                                    (III) specified an individual as 
                                the point of contact for the license 
                                holder to direct communications related 
                                to the sale of the covered product to 
                                the eligible product developer and a 
                                means for electronic and written 
                                communications with that individual; 
                                and
                                    (IV) specified an address to which 
                                the covered product was to be shipped 
                                upon reaching an agreement to transfer 
                                the covered product; and
                            (iv) that the license holder has not 
                        delivered to the eligible product developer 
                        sufficient quantities of the covered product on 
                        commercially reasonable, market-based terms--
                                    (I) for a covered product that is 
                                not subject to a REMS with ETASU, by 
                                the date that is 31 days after the date 
                                on which the license holder received 
                                the request for the covered product; 
                                and
                                    (II) for a covered product that is 
                                subject to a REMS with ETASU, by 31 
                                days after the later of--
                                            (aa) the date on which the 
                                        license holder received the 
                                        request for the covered 
                                        product; or
                                            (bb) the date on which the 
                                        license holder received a copy 
                                        of the covered product 
                                        authorization issued by the 
                                        Secretary in accordance with 
                                        subparagraph (B).
                    (B) Authorization for covered product subject to a 
                rems with etasu.--
                            (i) Request.--An eligible product developer 
                        may submit to the Secretary a written request 
                        for the eligible product developer to be 
                        authorized to obtain sufficient quantities of 
                        an individual covered product subject to a REMS 
                        with ETASU.
                            (ii) Authorization.--Not later than 120 
                        days after the date on which a request under 
                        clause (i) is received, the Secretary shall, by 
                        written notice, authorize the eligible product 
                        developer to obtain sufficient quantities of an 
                        individual covered product subject to a REMS 
                        with ETASU for purposes of--
                                    (I) development and testing that 
                                does not involve human clinical trials, 
                                if the eligible product developer has 
                                agreed to comply with any conditions 
                                the Secretary determines necessary; or
                                    (II) development and testing that 
                                involves human clinical trials, if the 
                                eligible product developer has--
                                            (aa)(AA) submitted 
                                        protocols, informed consent 
                                        documents, and informational 
                                        materials for testing that 
                                        include protections that 
                                        provide safety protections 
                                        comparable to those provided by 
                                        the REMS for the covered 
                                        product; or
                                            (BB) otherwise satisfied 
                                        the Secretary that such 
                                        protections will be provided; 
                                        and
                                            (bb) met any other 
                                        requirements the Secretary may 
                                        establish.
                            (iii) Notice.--A covered product 
                        authorization issued under this subparagraph 
                        shall state that the provision of the covered 
                        product by the license holder under the terms 
                        of the authorization will not be a violation of 
                        the REMS for the covered product.
            (3) Affirmative defense.--In a civil action brought under 
        paragraph (1), it shall be an affirmative defense, on which the 
        defendant has the burden of persuasion by a preponderance of 
        the evidence--
                    (A) that, on the date on which the eligible product 
                developer requested to purchase sufficient quantities 
                of the covered product from the license holder--
                            (i) neither the license holder nor any of 
                        its agents, wholesalers, or distributors was 
                        engaged in the manufacturing or commercial 
                        marketing of the covered product; and
                            (ii) neither the license holder nor any of 
                        its agents, wholesalers, or distributors 
                        otherwise had access to inventory of the 
                        covered product to supply to the eligible 
                        product developer on commercially reasonable, 
                        market-based terms;
                    (B) that--
                            (i) the license holder sells the covered 
                        product through agents, distributors, or 
                        wholesalers;
                            (ii) the license holder has placed no 
                        restrictions, explicit or implicit, on its 
                        agents, distributors, or wholesalers to sell 
                        covered products to eligible product 
                        developers; and
                            (iii) the covered product can be purchased 
                        by the eligible product developer in sufficient 
                        quantities on commercially reasonable, market-
                        based terms from the agents, distributors, or 
                        wholesalers of the license holder; or
                    (C) that the license holder made an offer to the 
                individual specified pursuant to paragraph 
                (2)(A)(iii)(III), by a means of communication 
                (electronic, written, or both) specified pursuant to 
                such paragraph, to sell sufficient quantities of the 
                covered product to the eligible product developer at 
                commercially reasonable market-based terms--
                            (i) for a covered product that is not 
                        subject to a REMS with ETASU, by the date that 
                        is 14 days after the date on which the license 
                        holder received the request for the covered 
                        product, and the eligible product developer did 
                        not accept such offer by the date that is 7 
                        days after the date on which the eligible 
                        product developer received such offer from the 
                        license holder; or
                            (ii) for a covered product that is subject 
                        to a REMS with ETASU, by the date that is 20 
                        days after the date on which the license holder 
                        received the request for the covered product, 
                        and the eligible product developer did not 
                        accept such offer by the date that is 10 days 
                        after the date on which the eligible product 
                        developer received such offer from the license 
                        holder.
            (4) Remedies.--
                    (A) In general.--If an eligible product developer 
                prevails in a civil action brought under paragraph (1), 
                the court shall--
                            (i) order the license holder to provide to 
                        the eligible product developer without delay 
                        sufficient quantities of the covered product on 
                        commercially reasonable, market-based terms;
                            (ii) award to the eligible product 
                        developer reasonable attorney's fees and costs 
                        of the civil action; and
                            (iii) award to the eligible product 
                        developer a monetary amount sufficient to deter 
                        the license holder from failing to provide 
                        eligible product developers with sufficient 
                        quantities of a covered product on commercially 
                        reasonable, market-based terms, if the court 
                        finds, by a preponderance of the evidence--
                                    (I) that the license holder delayed 
                                providing sufficient quantities of the 
                                covered product to the eligible product 
                                developer without a legitimate business 
                                justification; or
                                    (II) that the license holder failed 
                                to comply with an order issued under 
                                clause (i).
                    (B) Maximum monetary amount.--A monetary amount 
                awarded under subparagraph (A)(iii) shall not be 
                greater than the revenue that the license holder earned 
                on the covered product during the period--
                            (i) beginning on--
                                    (I) for a covered product that is 
                                not subject to a REMS with ETASU, the 
                                date that is 31 days after the date on 
                                which the license holder received the 
                                request; or
                                    (II) for a covered product that is 
                                subject to a REMS with ETASU, the date 
                                that is 31 days after the later of--
                                            (aa) the date on which the 
                                        license holder received the 
                                        request; or
                                            (bb) the date on which the 
                                        license holder received a copy 
                                        of the covered product 
                                        authorization issued by the 
                                        Secretary in accordance with 
                                        paragraph (2)(B); and
                            (ii) ending on the date on which the 
                        eligible product developer received sufficient 
                        quantities of the covered product.
                    (C) Avoidance of delay.--The court may issue an 
                order under subparagraph (A)(i) before conducting 
                further proceedings that may be necessary to determine 
                whether the eligible product developer is entitled to 
                an award under clause (ii) or (iii) of subparagraph 
                (A), or the amount of any such award.
    (c) Limitation of Liability.--A license holder for a covered 
product shall not be liable for any claim under Federal, State, or 
local law arising out of the failure of an eligible product developer 
to follow adequate safeguards to assure safe use of the covered product 
during development or testing activities described in this section, 
including transportation, handling, use, or disposal of the covered 
product by the eligible product developer.
    (d) No Violation of REMS.--Section 505-1 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
    ``(l) Provision of Samples Not a Violation of Strategy.--The 
provision of samples of a covered product to an eligible product 
developer (as those terms are defined in section 214(a) of the Lower 
Health Care Costs Act) shall not be considered a violation of the 
requirements of any risk evaluation and mitigation strategy that may be 
in place under this section for such drug.''.
    (e) Rule of Construction.--
            (1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``antitrust 
        laws''--
                    (A) has the meaning given the term in subsection 
                (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 
                12); and
                    (B) includes section 5 of the Federal Trade 
                Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) to the extent that such 
                section applies to unfair methods of competition.
            (2) Antitrust laws.--Nothing in this section shall be 
        construed to limit the operation of any provision of the 
        antitrust laws.
    (f) REMS Approval Process for Subsequent Filers.--Section 505-1 of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1), as amended 
by subsection (d), is further amended--
            (1) in subsection (g)(4)(B)--
                    (A) in clause (i) by striking ``or'' after the 
                semicolon;
                    (B) in clause (ii) by striking the period at the 
                end and inserting ``; or''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
                            ``(iii) accommodate different, comparable 
                        aspects of the elements to assure safe use for 
                        a drug that is the subject of an application 
                        under section 505(j), and the applicable listed 
                        drug.'';
            (2) in subsection (i)(1), by striking subparagraph (C) and 
        inserting the following:
                    ``(C)(i) Elements to assure safe use, if required 
                under subsection (f) for the listed drug, which, 
                subject to clause (ii), for a drug that is the subject 
                of an application under section 505(j) may use--
                            ``(I) a single, shared system with the 
                        listed drug under subsection (f); or
                            ``(II) a different, comparable aspect of 
                        the elements to assure safe use under 
                        subsection (f).
                    ``(ii) The Secretary may require a drug that is the 
                subject of an application under section 505(j) and the 
                listed drug to use a single, shared system under 
                subsection (f), if the Secretary determines that no 
                different, comparable aspect of the elements to assure 
                safe use could satisfy the requirements of subsection 
                (f).'';
            (3) in subsection (i), by adding at the end the following:
            ``(3) Shared rems.--If the Secretary approves, in 
        accordance with paragraph (1)(C)(i)(II), a different, 
        comparable aspect of the elements to assure safe use under 
        subsection (f) for a drug that is the subject of an abbreviated 
        new drug application under section 505(j), the Secretary may 
        require that such different comparable aspect of the elements 
        to assure safe use can be used with respect to any other drug 
        that is the subject of an application under section 505(j) or 
        505(b) that references the same listed drug.''; and
            (4) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(m) Separate REMS.--When used in this section, the terms 
`different, comparable aspect of the elements to assure safe use' or 
`different, comparable approved risk evaluation and mitigation 
strategies' means a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy for a drug 
that is the subject of an application under section 505(j) that uses 
different methods or operational means than the strategy required under 
subsection (a) for the applicable listed drug, or other application 
under section 505(j) with the same such listed drug, but achieves the 
same level of safety as such strategy.''.
    (g) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section, the amendments 
made by this section, or in section 505-1 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355-1), shall be construed as--
            (1) prohibiting a license holder from providing an eligible 
        product developer access to a covered product in the absence of 
        an authorization under this section; or
            (2) in any way negating the applicability of a REMS with 
        ETASU, as otherwise required under such section 505-1, with 
        respect to such covered product.

SEC. 215. REDUCING THE PRICE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:

            ``PART W--DRUG PRICE REPORTING; DRUG VALUE FUND

``SEC. 399OO. REPORTING ON JUSTIFICATION FOR DRUG PRICE INCREASES.

    ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
            ``(1) Manufacturer.--The term `manufacturer' means the 
        person--
                    ``(A) that holds the application for a drug 
                approved under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
                and Cosmetic Act or the license issued under section 
                351 of this Act; or
                    ``(B) who is responsible for setting the price for 
                the drug.
            ``(2) Qualifying drug.--The term `qualifying drug' means 
        any drug that is approved under subsection (c) or (j) of 
        section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or 
        licensed under subsection (a) or (k) of section 351 of this 
        Act--
                    ``(A) that has a wholesale acquisition cost of $100 
                or more per month supply, or per a course of treatment 
                that lasts less than a month, and is--
                            ``(i)(I) subject to section 503(b)(1) of 
                        the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; or
                            ``(II) commonly administered by hospitals 
                        (as determined by the Secretary); and
                            ``(ii) not designated by the Secretary as a 
                        vaccine; and
                    ``(B) for which, during the previous calendar year, 
                at least 1 dollar of the total amount of sales were for 
                individuals enrolled under the Medicare program under 
                title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 
                et seq.) or under a State Medicaid plan under title XIX 
                of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) or under a waiver 
                of such plan.
            ``(3) Wholesale acquisition cost.--The term `wholesale 
        acquisition cost' has the meaning given that term in section 
        1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-
        3a(c)(6)(B)).
    ``(b) Report.--
            ``(1) Report required.--The manufacturer of a qualifying 
        drug shall submit a report to the Secretary for each price 
        increase of a qualifying drug that will result in an increase 
        in the wholesale acquisition cost of that drug that is equal 
        to--
                    ``(A) 10 percent or more over a 12-month period; or
                    ``(B) 25 percent or more over a 36-month period.
            ``(2) Report deadline.--Each report described in paragraph 
        (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary not later than 30 days 
        prior to the planned effective date of such price increase.
    ``(c) Contents.--A report under subsection (b) shall, at a minimum, 
include--
            ``(1) with respect to the qualifying drug--
                    ``(A) the percentage by which the manufacturer will 
                raise the wholesale acquisition cost of the drug on the 
                planned effective date of such price increase;
                    ``(B) a justification for, and description of, each 
                manufacturer's price increase that will occur during 
                the 12-month period described in subsection (b)(1)(A) 
                or the 36-month period described in subsection 
                (b)(1)(B), as applicable;
                    ``(C) the identity of the initial developer of the 
                drug;
                    ``(D) a description of the history of the 
                manufacturer's price increases for the drug since the 
                approval of the application for the drug under section 
                505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or the 
                issuance of the license for the drug under section 351, 
                or since the manufacturer acquired such approved 
                application or license;
                    ``(E) the current list price of the drug;
                    ``(F) the total expenditures of the manufacturer 
                on--
                            ``(i) materials and manufacturing for such 
                        drug; and
                            ``(ii) acquiring patents and licensing for 
                        such drug;
                    ``(G) the percentage of total expenditures of the 
                manufacturer on research and development for such drug 
                that was derived from Federal funds;
                    ``(H) the total expenditures of the manufacturer on 
                research and development for such drug that is used 
                for--
                            ``(i) basic and preclinical research;
                            ``(ii) clinical research;
                            ``(iii) new drug development;
                            ``(iv) pursuing new or expanded indications 
                        for such drug through supplemental applications 
                        under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, 
                        and Cosmetic Act or section 351 of this Act; 
                        and
                            ``(v) carrying out postmarket requirements 
                        related to such drug, including those under 
                        section 505(o)(3) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
                        and Cosmetic Act;
                    ``(I) the total revenue and the net profit 
                generated from the qualifying drug for each calendar 
                year since the approval of the application for the drug 
                under section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
                Cosmetic Act or the issuance of the license for the 
                drug under section 351, or since the manufacturer 
                acquired such approved application or license; and
                    ``(J) the total costs associated with marketing and 
                advertising for the qualifying drug;
            ``(2) with respect to the manufacturer--
                    ``(A) the total revenue and the net profit of the 
                manufacturer--
                            ``(i) for the 12-month period preceding the 
                        date of the report, in the case of a report 
                        based on an increase described in subsection 
                        (b)(1)(A); or
                            ``(ii) for the 36-month period preceding 
                        the date of the report, in the case of a report 
                        based on an increase described in subsection 
                        (b)(1)(B);
                    ``(B) all stock-based performance metrics used by 
                the manufacturer to determine executive compensation--
                            ``(i) for the12-month period preceding the 
                        date of the report, in the case of a report 
                        based on an increase described in subsection 
                        (b)(1)(A); or
                            ``(ii) for the 36-month period preceding 
                        the date of the report, in the case of a report 
                        based on an increase described in subsection 
                        (b)(1)(B); and
                    ``(C) any additional information the manufacturer 
                chooses to provide related to drug pricing decisions, 
                such as total expenditures on--
                            ``(i) drug research and development; or
                            ``(ii) clinical trials on drugs that failed 
                        to receive approval by the Food and Drug 
                        Administration; and
            ``(3) such other related information as the Secretary 
        considers appropriate, as specified through notice and comment 
        rulemaking.
    ``(d) Civil Penalty.--Any manufacturer of a qualifying drug that 
fails to submit a report for the drug as required by this section shall 
be subject to a civil penalty of $100,000 for each day on which the 
violation continues.
    ``(e) Public Posting.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), not later than 
        30 days after the submission of a report under subsection (b), 
        the Secretary shall post the report on the public website of 
        the Department of Health and Human Services.
            ``(2) Format.--In developing the format of such report for 
        public posting, the Secretary shall consult stakeholders, 
        including beneficiary groups, and shall seek feedback on the 
        content and format from consumer advocates and readability 
        experts to ensure such public reports are user-friendly to the 
        public and are written in plain language that consumers can 
        readily understand.
            ``(3) Trade secrets and confidential information.--In 
        carrying out this section the Secretary shall enforce current 
        law concerning the protection of confidential commercial 
        information and trade secrets.''.

``SEC. 399OO-1. USE OF CIVIL PENALTY AMOUNTS.

    ``The Secretary shall, without further appropriation, collect civil 
penalties under section 399OO and use the funds derived from such civil 
penalties, in addition to any other amounts available to the Secretary, 
to carry out activities described in this part and to improve consumer 
and provider information about drug value and drug price transparency.

``SEC. 399OO-2. ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS.

    ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary shall 
submit to Congress, and post on the public website of the Department of 
Health and Human Services in a way that is easy to find, use, and 
understand, an annual report--
            ``(1) summarizing the information reported pursuant to 
        section 399OO; and
            ``(2) including copies of the reports and supporting 
        detailed economic analyses submitted pursuant to such section.
    ``(b) Trade Secrets and Confidential Information.--In carrying out 
this section the Secretary shall enforce current law concerning the 
protection of confidential commercial information and trade secrets.''.

            TITLE III--IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTH CARE

SEC. 301. INCREASING TRANSPARENCY BY REMOVING GAG CLAUSES ON PRICE AND 
              QUALITY INFORMATION.

    Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by section 103, is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729B. INCREASING TRANSPARENCY BY REMOVING GAG CLAUSES ON PRICE 
              AND QUALITY INFORMATION.

    ``(a) Increasing Price and Quality Transparency for Plan Sponsors 
and Group and Individual Market and Consumers.--
            ``(1) Group health plans.--A group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage may 
        not enter into an agreement with a health care provider, 
        network or association of providers, third-party administrator, 
        or other service provider offering access to a network of 
        providers that would directly or indirectly restrict a group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer from--
                    ``(A) providing provider-specific cost or quality 
                of care information, through a consumer engagement tool 
                or any other means, to referring providers, the plan 
                sponsor, enrollees, or eligible enrollees of the plan 
                or coverage;
                    ``(B) electronically accessing de-identified claims 
                and encounter data for each enrollee in the plan or 
                coverage, upon request and consistent with the privacy 
                regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of 
                the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
                Act, the amendments to this Act made by the Genetic 
                Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, and the 
                Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, with respect 
                to the applicable health plan or health insurance 
                coverage, including, on a per claim basis--
                            ``(i) financial information, such as the 
                        allowed amount, or any other claim-related 
                        financial obligations included in the provider 
                        contract;
                            ``(ii) provider information, including name 
                        and clinical designation;
                            ``(iii) service codes; or
                            ``(iv) any other data element normally 
                        included in claim or encounter transactions 
                        when received by a plan or issuer; or
                    ``(C) sharing data described in subparagraph (A) or 
                (B) with a business associate as defined in section 
                160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
                successor regulations), consistent with the privacy 
                regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of 
                the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
                Act, the amendments to this Act made by the Genetic 
                Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, and the 
                Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
            ``(2) Individual health insurance coverage.--A health 
        insurance issuer offering individual health insurance coverage 
        may not enter into an agreement with a health care provider, 
        network or association of providers, or other service provider 
        offering access to a network of providers that would directly 
        or indirectly restrict the health insurance issuer from--
                    ``(A) providing provider-specific price or quality 
                of care information, through a consumer engagement tool 
                or any other means, to referring providers, enrollees, 
                or eligible enrollees of the plan or coverage; or
                    ``(B) sharing, for plan design, plan 
                administration, and plan, financial, legal, and quality 
                improvement activities, data described in subparagraph 
                (A) with a business associate as defined in section 
                160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
                successor regulations), consistent with the privacy 
                regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of 
                the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
                Act, the amendments to this Act made by the Genetic 
                Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, and the 
                Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
            ``(3) Clarification regarding public disclosure of 
        information.--Nothing in paragraph (1)(A) or (2)(A) prevents a 
        health care provider, network or association of providers, or 
        other service provider from placing reasonable restrictions on 
        the public disclosure of the information described in such 
        paragraphs (1) and (2).
            ``(4) Attestation.--A group health plan or a health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage shall annually submit to, as applicable, the 
        applicable authority described in section 2723 or the Secretary 
        of Labor, an attestation that such plan or issuer is in 
        compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
            ``(5) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
        be construed to otherwise limit group health plan, plan 
        sponsor, or health insurance issuer access to data currently 
        permitted under the privacy regulations promulgated pursuant to 
        section 264(c) of the Health Insurance Portability and 
        Accountability Act, the amendments to this Act made by the 
        Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, and the 
        Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.''.

SEC. 302. BANNING ANTICOMPETITIVE TERMS IN FACILITY AND INSURANCE 
              CONTRACTS THAT LIMIT ACCESS TO HIGHER QUALITY, LOWER COST 
              CARE.

    (a) In General.--Section 2729B of the Public Health Service Act, as 
added by section 301, is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(b) Protecting Health Plans Network Design Flexibility.--
            ``(1) In general.--A group health plan or a health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage shall not enter into an agreement with a provider, 
        network or association of providers, or other service provider 
        offering access to a network of service providers if such 
        agreement, directly or indirectly--
                    ``(A) restricts the group health plan or health 
                insurance issuer from--
                            ``(i) directing or steering enrollees to 
                        other health care providers; or
                            ``(ii) offering incentives to encourage 
                        enrollees to utilize specific health care 
                        providers; or
                    ``(B) requires the group health plan or health 
                insurance issuer to enter into any additional contract 
                with an affiliate of the provider, such as an affiliate 
                of the provider, as a condition of entering into a 
                contract with such provider;
                    ``(C) requires the group health plan or health 
                insurance issuer to agree to payment rates or other 
                terms for any affiliate not party to the contract of 
                the provider involved; or
                    ``(D) restricts other group health plans or health 
                insurance issuers not party to the contract from paying 
                a lower rate for items or services than the contracting 
                plan or issuer pays for such items or services.
            ``(2) Additional requirement for self-insured plans.--A 
        self-insured group health plan shall not enter into an 
        agreement with a provider, network or association of providers, 
        third-party administrator, or other service provider offering 
        access to a network of providers if such agreement directly or 
        indirectly requires the group health plan to certify, attest, 
        or otherwise confirm in writing that the group health plan is 
        bound by restrictive contracting terms between the service 
        provider and a third-party administrator that the group health 
        plan is not party to, without a disclosure that such terms 
        exist.
            ``(3) Exception for certain group model issuers.--Paragraph 
        (1)(A) shall not apply to a group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage with respect to--
                    ``(A) a health maintenance organization (as defined 
                in section 2791(b)(3)), if such health maintenance 
                organization operates primarily through exclusive 
                contracts with multi-specialty physician groups, nor to 
                any arrangement between such a health maintenance 
                organization and its affiliates; or
                    ``(B) a value-based network arrangement, such as an 
                exclusive provider network, accountable care 
                organization, center of excellence, a provider 
                sponsored health insurance issuer that operates 
                primarily through aligned multi-specialty physician 
                group practices or integrated health systems, or such 
                other similar network arrangements as determined by the 
                Secretary through rulemaking.
            ``(4) Attestation.--A group health plan or health insurance 
        issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
        shall annually submit to, as applicable, the applicable 
        authority described in section 2723 or the Secretary of Labor, 
        an attestation that such plan or issuer is in compliance with 
        the requirements of this subsection.
    ``(c) Maintenance of Existing HIPAA, GINA, and ADA Protections.--
Nothing in this section shall modify, reduce, or eliminate the existing 
privacy protections and standards provided by reason of State and 
Federal law, including the requirements of parts 160 and 164 of title 
45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulations).
    ``(d) Regulations.--The Secretary, not later than 1 year after the 
date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, shall promulgate 
regulations to carry out this section.
    ``(e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit network design or cost or quality initiatives by a 
group health plan or health insurance issuer, including accountable 
care organizations, exclusive provider organizations, networks that 
tier providers by cost or quality or steer enrollees to centers of 
excellence, or other pay-for-performance programs.
    ``(f) Clarification With Respect to Antitrust Laws.--Compliance 
with this section does not constitute compliance with the antitrust 
laws, as defined in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton 
Act (15 U.S.C. 12(a)).''.
    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2729B of the Public Health Service Act 
(as added by section 301 and amended by subsection (a)) shall apply 
with respect to any contract entered into on or after the date that is 
18 months after the date of enactment of this Act. With respect to an 
applicable contract that is in effect on the date of enactment of this 
Act, such section 2729B shall apply on the earlier of the date of 
renewal of such contract or 3 years after such date of enactment.

SEC. 303. DESIGNATION OF A NONGOVERNMENTAL, NONPROFIT TRANSPARENCY 
              ORGANIZATION TO LOWER AMERICANS' HEALTH CARE COSTS.

    (a) In General.--Subpart C of title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-91 et seq.), as amended by section 102, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2796. DESIGNATION OF A NONGOVERNMENTAL, NONPROFIT TRANSPARENCY 
              ORGANIZATION TO LOWER AMERICANS' HEALTH CARE COSTS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Labor, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, shall enter into a contract with a 
nonprofit entity to support the establishment and maintenance of a 
database that receives and utilizes health care claims information and 
related information and issues reports that are available to the public 
and authorized users, and are submitted to the Department of Health and 
Human Services.
    ``(b) Requirements.--
            ``(1) In general.--The database established under 
        subsection (a) shall--
                    ``(A) improve transparency by using de-identified 
                health care data to--
                            ``(i) inform patients about the cost, 
                        quality, and value of their care;
                            ``(ii) assist providers and hospitals, as 
                        they work with patients, to make informed 
                        choices about care;
                            ``(iii) enable providers, hospitals, and 
                        communities to improve services and outcomes 
                        for patients by benchmarking their performance 
                        against that of other providers, hospitals, and 
                        communities;
                            ``(iv) enable purchasers, including 
                        employers, employee organizations, and health 
                        plans, to develop value-based purchasing 
                        models, improve quality, and reduce the cost of 
                        health care and insurance coverage for 
                        enrollees;
                            ``(v) enable employers and employee 
                        organizations to evaluate network design and 
                        construction, and the cost of care for 
                        enrollees;
                            ``(vi) facilitate State-led initiatives to 
                        lower health care costs and improve quality; 
                        and
                            ``(vii) promote competition based on 
                        quality and cost;
                    ``(B) collect medical claims, prescription drug 
                claims, and remittance data consistent with the 
                protections and requirements of subsection (d);
                    ``(C) be established in such a manner that allows 
                the data collected pursuant to subparagraph (B) to be 
                shared with any State all-payer claims database or 
                regional database operated with authorization from 
                States, at cost, using a standardized format, if such 
                State or regional database also submits claims data to 
                the database established under this section; and
                    ``(D) be available to--
                            ``(i) the Director of the Congressional 
                        Budget Office, the Comptroller General of the 
                        United States, the Executive Director of the 
                        Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, and the 
                        Executive Director of the Medicaid and CHIP 
                        Payment Advisory Commission, upon request, 
                        subject to the privacy and security 
                        requirements of authorized users under 
                        subsection (e)(2); and
                            ``(ii) authorized users, including 
                        employers, employee organizations, providers, 
                        researchers, and policymakers, subject to 
                        subsection (e).
            ``(2) Privacy and security; breach notifications.--
                    ``(A) Regulations.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
                        issue regulations prescribing the extent to 
                        which, and the manner in which, the following 
                        rules (and any successors of such rules) shall 
                        apply to the activities under this section of 
                        an entity receiving a contract under subsection 
                        (a):
                                    ``(I) The Privacy Rule under part 
                                160 and subparts A and E of part 164 of 
                                title 45, Code of Federal Regulations 
                                (or any successor regulations).
                                    ``(II) The Security Rule under part 
                                160 and subparts A and C of part 164 of 
                                such title 45 (or any successor 
                                regulations).
                                    ``(III) The Breach Notification 
                                Rule under part 160 and subparts A and 
                                D of part 164 of such title 45 (or any 
                                successor regulations).
                            ``(ii) Supplemental regulations.--In order 
                        to ensure data privacy and security and the 
                        notification of breaches, the Secretary may 
                        issue such supplemental regulations on the 
                        subjects of the rules listed under clause (i) 
                        as the Secretary determines appropriate to 
                        address differences between the activities 
                        described by this section and the activities 
                        covered by such rules.
                    ``(B) Enforcement.--Section 1176 of Social Security 
                Act shall apply with respect to a violation of this 
                paragraph in the same manner such section 1176 applies 
                to a violation of part C of title XI of the Social 
                Security Act, and the Secretary may include in the 
                regulations promulgated under this section provisions 
                to apply such section to this paragraph.
                    ``(C) Procedure.--
                            ``(i) Timing.--The Secretary shall issue 
                        the initial set of regulations under this 
                        paragraph not later than 1 year after the date 
                        of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
                        Act.
                            ``(ii) Authority to use interim final 
                        procedures.--The Secretary may make such 
                        initial set of regulations effective and final 
                        immediately upon issuance, on an interim basis, 
                        and provide for a period of public comment on 
                        such initial set of regulations after the date 
                        of publication.
                    ``(D) Requirements of entity.--The entity receiving 
                the contract under this section shall--
                            ``(i) not disclose to the public any 
                        individually identifiable health information or 
                        proprietary financial information;
                            ``(ii) strictly limit staff access to the 
                        data to staff with appropriate training, 
                        clearance, and background checks and require 
                        regular privacy and security training;
                            ``(iii) maintain effective security 
                        standards for transferring data or making data 
                        available to authorized users;
                            ``(iv) develop a process for providing 
                        access to data to authorized users, in a secure 
                        manner that maintains privacy and 
                        confidentiality of data; and
                            ``(v) adhere to current best security 
                        practices with respect to the management and 
                        use of such data for health services research, 
                        in accordance with applicable Federal privacy 
                        law
            ``(3) Consultation.--
                    ``(A) Advisory committee.--Not later than 180 days 
                after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care 
                Costs Act, the Secretary shall convene an Advisory 
                Committee (referred to in this section as the 
                `Committee'), consisting of 13 members, to advise the 
                Secretary, the contracting entity, and Congress on the 
                establishment, operations, and use of the database 
                established under this section.
                    ``(B) Membership.--
                            ``(i) Appointment.--In accordance with 
                        clause (ii), the Secretary, in consultation 
                        with the Secretary of Labor and the Comptroller 
                        General of the United States shall, not later 
                        than 180 days after the date of enactment of 
                        the Lower Health Care Costs Act, appoint 
                        members to the Committee who have distinguished 
                        themselves in the fields of health services 
                        research, health economics, health informatics, 
                        or the governance of State all-payer claims 
                        databases, or who represent organizations 
                        likely to submit data to or use the database, 
                        including patients, employers, or employee 
                        organizations that sponsor group health plans, 
                        health care providers, health insurance 
                        issuers, or third-party administrators of group 
                        health plans. Such members shall serve 3-year 
                        terms on a staggered basis. Vacancies on the 
                        Committee shall be filled by appointment 
                        consistent with this subsection not later than 
                        3 months after the vacancy arises.
                            ``(ii) Composition.--In accordance with 
                        clause (i)--
                                    ``(I) the Secretary, in 
                                consultation with the Secretary of 
                                Labor, shall appoint to the Committee--
                                            ``(aa) 1 member selected by 
                                        the Secretary, in coordination 
                                        with the Secretary of Labor, to 
                                        serve as the chair of the 
                                        Committee;
                                            ``(bb) the Assistant 
                                        Secretary for Planning and 
                                        Evaluation of the Department of 
                                        Health and Human Services, or a 
                                        designee of such Assistant 
                                        Secretary;
                                            ``(cc) 1 representative of 
                                        the Centers for Medicare & 
                                        Medicaid Services;
                                            ``(dd) 1 representative of 
                                        the Agency for Health Research 
                                        and Quality;
                                            ``(ee) 1 representative of 
                                        the Office for Civil Rights of 
                                        the Department of Health and 
                                        Human Services with expertise 
                                        in data privacy and security;
                                            ``(ff) 1 representative of 
                                        the National Center for Health 
                                        Statistics; and
                                            ``(gg) 1 representative of 
                                        the Employee Benefits and 
                                        Security Administration of the 
                                        Department of Labor; and
                                    ``(II) the Comptroller General of 
                                the United States shall appoint to the 
                                Committee--
                                            ``(aa) 1 representative of 
                                        an employer that sponsors a 
                                        group health plan;
                                            ``(bb) 1 representative of 
                                        an employee organization that 
                                        sponsors a group health plan;
                                            ``(cc) 1 academic 
                                        researcher with expertise in 
                                        health economics or health 
                                        services research;
                                            ``(dd) 1 consumer advocate; 
                                        and
                                            ``(ee) 2 additional 
                                        members.
                    ``(C) Duties.--The Committee shall--
                            ``(i) advise the Secretary on the 
                        management of the contract under subsection 
                        (a);
                            ``(ii) assist and advise the entity 
                        receiving the contract under subsection (a) in 
                        establishing--
                                    ``(I) the scope and format of the 
                                data to be submitted under subsection 
                                (d);
                                    ``(II) best practices with respect 
                                to de-identification of data, as 
                                appropriate;
                                    ``(III) the appropriate uses of 
                                data by authorized users, including 
                                developing standards for the approval 
                                of requests by organizations to access 
                                and use the data; and
                                    ``(IV) the appropriate formats and 
                                methods for making reports and analyses 
                                based on the database to the public;
                            ``(iii) conduct an annual review of whether 
                        data was used according to the appropriate uses 
                        as described in clause (ii)(II), and advise the 
                        designated entity on using the data for 
                        authorized purposes;
                            ``(iv) report, as appropriate, to the 
                        Secretary and Congress on the operation of the 
                        database and opportunities to better achieve 
                        the objectives of this section;
                            ``(v) establish additional restrictions on 
                        researchers who receive compensation from 
                        entities described in subsection (e)(2)(B)(ii), 
                        in order to protect proprietary financial 
                        information; and
                            ``(vi) establish objectives for research 
                        and public reporting.
            ``(4) State requirements.--A State may require health 
        insurance issuers and other payers to submit claims data to the 
        database established under this section, provided that such 
        data is submitted to the entity awarded the contract under this 
        section in a form and manner established by the Secretary, and 
        pursuant to subsection (d)(4)(B).
            ``(5) Sanctions.--The Secretary shall take appropriate 
        action to sanction users who attempt to re-identify data 
        accessed pursuant to paragraph (1)(D).
    ``(c) Contract Requirements.--
            ``(1) Competitive procedures.--The Secretary shall enter 
        into the contract under subsection (a) using full and open 
        competition procedures pursuant to chapter 33 of title 41, 
        United States Code.
            ``(2) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to enter into a 
        contract described in subsection (a), an entity shall--
                    ``(A) be a private nonprofit entity governed by a 
                board that includes representatives of the academic 
                research community and individuals with expertise in 
                employer-sponsored insurance, research using health 
                care claims data and actuarial analysis;
                    ``(B) conduct its business in an open and 
                transparent manner that provides the opportunity for 
                public comment on its activities; and
                    ``(C) agree to comply with any requirements imposed 
                under the rulemaking described in subsection (d)(4)(A).
            ``(3) Considerations.--In awarding the contract under 
        subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider an entity's 
        experience in--
                    ``(A) health care claims data collection, 
                aggregation, quality assurance, analysis, and security;
                    ``(B) supporting academic research on health costs, 
                spending, and utilization for and by privately insured 
                patients;
                    ``(C) working with large health insurance issuers 
                and third-party administrators to assemble a national 
                claims database;
                    ``(D) effectively collaborating with and engaging 
                stakeholders to develop reports;
                    ``(E) meeting budgets and timelines, including in 
                connection with report generation; and
                    ``(F) facilitating the creation of, or supporting, 
                State all-payer claims databases.
            ``(4) Contract term.--A contract awarded under this section 
        shall be for a period of 5 years, and may be renewed after a 
        subsequent competitive bidding process under this section.
            ``(5) Transition of contract.--If the Secretary, following 
        a competitive process at the end of the contract period, 
        selects a new entity to maintain the database, all data shall 
        be transferred to the new entity according to a schedule and 
        process to be determined by the Secretary. Upon termination of 
        a contract, no entity may keep data held by the database or 
        disclose such data to any entity other than the entity so 
        designated by the Secretary. The Secretary shall include 
        enforcement terms in any contract with an organization chosen 
        under this section, to ensure the timely transfer of all data, 
        and any associated code or algorithms, to a new entity in the 
        event of contract termination.
    ``(d) Receiving Health Information.--
            ``(1) Requirements.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
                ensure that the applicable self-insured group health 
                plan, through its third-party administrator, pharmacy 
                benefit manager, or other entity designated by the 
                group health plan, as applicable, electronically 
                submits all claims data with respect to the plan, 
                pursuant to subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Scope of information and format of 
                submission.--The entity awarded the contract under 
                subsection (a), in consultation with the Committee 
                described in subsection (b)(3), and pursuant to the 
                privacy and security requirements of subsection (b)(2), 
                shall--
                            ``(i) specify the data elements required to 
                        be submitted under subparagraph (A), which 
                        shall include all data related to transactions 
                        described in subparagraphs (A) and (E) of 
                        section 1173(a)(2) of the Social Security Act, 
                        including all data elements normally present in 
                        such transactions when adjudicated, and 
                        enrollment information;
                            ``(ii) specify the form and manner for such 
                        submissions, and the historical period to be 
                        included in the initial submission; and
                            ``(iii) offer an automated submission 
                        option to minimize administrative burdens for 
                        entities required to submit data.
                    ``(C) De-identification of data.--The entity 
                awarded the contract under subsection (a) shall--
                            ``(i) establish a process under which data 
                        is de-identified consistent with the de-
                        identification requirements under section 
                        164.514 of title 45, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations), 
                        while retaining the ability to link data 
                        longitudinally for the purposes of research on 
                        cost and quality, and the ability to complete 
                        risk adjustment and geographic analysis;
                            ``(ii) ensure that any third-party 
                        subcontractors who perform the de-
                        identification process described in clause (i) 
                        retain only the minimum necessary information 
                        to perform such a process, and adhere to 
                        effective security and encryption practices in 
                        data storage and transmission;
                            ``(iii) store claims and other data 
                        collected under this subsection only in de-
                        identified form, in accordance with section 
                        164.514 of title 45, Code of Federal 
                        Regulations (or any successor regulations); and
                            ``(iv) ensure that individually 
                        identifiable data is encrypted, in accordance 
                        with guidance issued by the Secretary under 
                        section 13402(h)(2) of the HITECH Act.
            ``(2) Applicable self-insured group health plan.--For 
        purposes of paragraph (1), a self-insured group health plan is 
        an applicable self-insured group health plan if such plan is 
        self-administered, or is administered by a third-party plan 
        administrator that meets 1 or both of the following criteria:
                    ``(A) Administers health, medical, or pharmacy 
                benefits for more than 50,000 enrollees.
                    ``(B) Is one of the 5 largest administrators or 
                issuers of self-insured group health plans in a State 
                in which such administrator operates, as measured by 
                the aggregate number of enrollees in plans administered 
                by such administrator in such State, as determined by 
                the Secretary.
            ``(3) Third-party administrators.--In the case of a third-
        party administrator that is required under this subsection to 
        submit claims data with respect to an applicable self-insured 
        group health plan, such administrator shall submit claims data 
        with respect to all self-insured group health plans that the 
        administrator administers, including such plans that are not 
        applicable self-insured group health plans, as described in 
        paragraph (2).
            ``(4) Receiving other information.--
                    ``(A) Medicare data.--The Secretary, through 
                rulemaking, shall ensure that the data made available 
                to such entity is available to qualified entities under 
                section 1874(e) of the Social Security Act is made 
                available to the entity awarded a contract under 
                subsection (a).
                    ``(B) State data.--The entity awarded the contract 
                under subsection (a) shall collect data from State all 
                payer claims databases that seek access to the database 
                established under this section.
            ``(5) Availability of data.--An entity required to submit 
        data under this subsection may not place any restrictions on 
        the use of such data by authorized users.
    ``(e) Uses of Information.--
            ``(1) In general.--The entity awarded the contract under 
        subsection (a) shall make the database available to users who 
        are authorized under this subsection, at cost, and reports and 
        analyses based on the data available to the public with no 
        charge.
            ``(2) Authorization of users.--
                    ``(A) In general.--An entity may request 
                authorization by the entity awarded the contract under 
                subsection (a) for access to the database in accordance 
                with this paragraph.
                    ``(B) Application.--An entity desiring 
                authorization under this paragraph shall submit to the 
                entity awarded the contract an application for such 
                access, which shall include--
                            ``(i) in the case of an entity requesting 
                        access for research purposes--
                                    ``(I) a description of the uses and 
                                methodologies for evaluating health 
                                system performance using such data; and
                                    ``(II) documentation of approval of 
                                the research by an institutional review 
                                board, if applicable for a particular 
                                plan of research; or
                            ``(ii) in the case of an entity such as an 
                        employer, health insurance issuer, third-party 
                        administrator, or health care provider, 
                        requesting access for the purpose of quality 
                        improvement or cost-containment, a description 
                        of the intended uses for such data.
                    ``(C) Requirements.--
                            ``(i) Research.--Upon approval of an 
                        application for research purposes under 
                        subparagraph (B)(i), the authorized user shall 
                        enter into a data use and confidentiality 
                        agreement with the entity awarded the contract 
                        under subsection (a), which shall include a 
                        prohibition on attempts to reidentify and 
                        disclose individually identifiable health 
                        information and proprietary financial 
                        information.
                            ``(ii) Quality improvement and cost-
                        containment.--In consultation with the 
                        Committee described in subsection (b)(3), the 
                        Secretary shall, through rulemaking, establish 
                        the form and manner in which authorized users 
                        described in subparagraph (B)(ii) may access 
                        data. Data provided to such authorized users 
                        shall be provided in a form and manner such 
                        that users may not obtain individually 
                        identifiable price information with respect to 
                        direct competitors. Upon approval, such 
                        authorized user shall enter into a data use and 
                        confidentiality agreement with the entity.
                            ``(iii) Customized reports.--Employers and 
                        employer organizations may request customized 
                        reports from the entity awarded the contract 
                        under subsection (a), at cost, subject to the 
                        requirements of this section with respect to 
                        privacy, security, and proprietary financial 
                        information.
                            ``(iv) Non-customized reports.--The entity 
                        awarded the contract under subsection (a), in 
                        consultation with the Committee, shall make 
                        available to all authorized users aggregate 
                        data sets, free of charge.
    ``(f) Funding.--
            ``(1) Initial funding.--There are authorized to be 
        appropriated, and there are appropriated, out of monies in the 
        Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $20,000,000 for fiscal 
        year 2020, for the implementation of the initial contract and 
        establishment of the database under this section.
            ``(2) Ongoing funding.--There are authorized to be 
        appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2021 through 
        2025, for purposes of carrying out this section (other than the 
        grant program under subsection (h)).
    ``(g) Annual Report.--
            ``(1) Submission.--On each of the dates described in 
        paragraph (2), the entity receiving the contract under 
        subsection (a) shall submit to Congress, the Secretary of 
        Health and Human Services, and the Secretary of Labor and 
        publish online for access by the general public, a report 
        containing a description of--
                    ``(A) trends in the price, utilization, and total 
                spending on health care services, including a 
                geographic analysis of differences in such trends;
                    ``(B) limitations in the data set;
                    ``(C) progress towards the objectives of this 
                section; and
                    ``(D) the performance by the entity of the duties 
                required under such contract.
            ``(2) Dates described.--The reports described in paragraph 
        (1) shall be submitted--
                    ``(A) not later than 3 years after the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act;
                    ``(B) the later of 1 year after the date that is 3 
                years after such date of enactment or March 1 of the 
                year after the date that is 3 years after such date of 
                enactment; and
                    ``(C) March 1 of each year thereafter.
            ``(3) Public reports and research.--The entity receiving a 
        contract under subsection (a) shall, in coordination with 
        authorized users, make analyses and research available to the 
        public on an ongoing basis to promote the objectives of this 
        section.
    ``(h) Grants to States.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
        Secretary of Labor, may award grants to States for the purpose 
        of establishing and maintaining State all-payer claims 
        databases that improve transparency of data in order to meet 
        the goals of subsection (a)(1).
            ``(2) Requirement.--To be eligible to receive the funding 
        under paragraph (1), a State shall submit data to the database 
        as described in subsection (b)(1)(C), using the format 
        described in subsection (d)(1).
            ``(3) Funding.--There is authorized to be appropriated 
        $100,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2020 through 2029 
        for the purpose of awarding grants to States under this 
        subsection.
    ``(i) Exemption From Public Disclosure.--
            ``(1) In general.--Claims data provided to the database, 
        and the database itself shall not be considered public records 
        and shall be exempt from public disclosure requirements.
            ``(2) Restrictions on uses for certain proceedings.--Data 
        disclosed to authorized users shall not be subject to discovery 
        or admission as public information, or evidence in judicial or 
        administrative proceedings without consent of the affected 
        parties.
    ``(j) Definitions.--
            ``(1) Individually identifiable health information.--The 
        term `individually identifiable health information' has the 
        meaning given such term in section 1171(6) of the Social 
        Security Act.
            ``(2) Proprietary financial information.--The term 
        `proprietary financial information' means data that would 
        disclose the terms of a specific contract between an individual 
        health care provider or facility and a specific group health 
        plan, Medicaid managed care organization or other managed care 
        entity, or health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
        coverage.
    ``(k) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to affect or modify enforcement of the privacy, security, or 
breach notification rules promulgated under section 264(c) of the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (or 
successor regulations).''.
    (b) GAO Report.--
            (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
        States shall conduct a study on--
                    (A) the performance of the entity awarded a 
                contract under section 2795(a) of the Public Health 
                Service Act, as added by subsection (a), under such 
                contract;
                    (B) the privacy and security of the information 
                reported to the entity; and
                    (C) the costs incurred by such entity in performing 
                such duties.
            (2) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the effective 
        date of the first contract entered into under section 2795(a) 
        of the Public Health Service Act, as added by subsection (a), 
        and again not later than 4 years after such effective date, the 
        Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
        Congress a report containing the results of the study conducted 
        under paragraph (1), together with recommendations for such 
        legislation and administrative action as the Comptroller 
        General determines appropriate.

SEC. 304. PROTECTING PATIENTS AND IMPROVING THE ACCURACY OF PROVIDER 
              DIRECTORY INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by sections 
301 and 302, is further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729C. PROTECTING PATIENTS AND IMPROVING THE ACCURACY OF 
              PROVIDER DIRECTORY INFORMATION.

    ``(a) Network Status of Providers.--
            ``(1) In general.--Beginning on the date that is one year 
        after the date of enactment of this section, a group health 
        plan or a health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
        health insurance coverage shall--
                    ``(A) establish business processes to ensure that 
                all enrollees in such plan or coverage receive proof of 
                a health care provider's network status, based on what 
                a plan or issuer knows or could reasonably know--
                            ``(i) through a written electronic 
                        communication from the plan or issuer to the 
                        enrollee, as soon as practicable and not later 
                        than 1 business day after a telephone inquiry 
                        is made by such enrollee for such information;
                            ``(ii) through an oral confirmation, 
                        documented by such issuer or coverage, and kept 
                        in the enrollee's file for a minimum of 2 
                        years; and
                            ``(iii) in real-time through an online 
                        health care provider directory search tool 
                        maintained by the plan or issuer; and
                    ``(B) include in any print directory a disclosure 
                that the information included in the directory is 
                accurate as of the date of the last data update and 
                that enrollees or prospective enrollees should consult 
                the group health plan or issuer's electronic provider 
                directory on its website or call a specified customer 
                service telephone number to obtain the most current 
                provider directory information.
            ``(2) Group health plan and health insurance issuer 
        business processes.--Beginning on the date that is one year 
        after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, 
        a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group 
        or individual health insurance coverage shall establish 
        business processes to--
                    ``(A) verify and update, at least once every 90 
                days, the provider directory information for all 
                providers included in the online health care provider 
                directory search tool described in paragraph 
                (1)(A)(iii); and
                    ``(B) remove any provider from such online 
                directory search tool if such provider has not verified 
                the directory information within the previous 6 months 
                or the plan or issuer has been unable to verify the 
                provider's network participation.
    ``(b) Cost-sharing Limitations.--
            ``(1) In general.--A group health plan or a health 
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance 
        coverage shall not apply, and shall ensure that no provider 
        applies cost-sharing to an enrollee for treatment or services 
        provided by a health care provider in excess of the normal 
        cost-sharing applied for in-network care (including any balance 
        bill issued by the health care provider involved), if such 
        enrollee, or health care provider referring such enrollee, 
        demonstrates (based on the electronic, written information 
        described in subsection (a)(1)(A)(i), the oral confirmation 
        described in subsection (a)(1)(A)(ii), or a copy of the online 
        provider directory described in subsection (a)(1)(A)(iii) on 
        the date the enrollee attempted to obtain the provider's 
        network status) that the enrollee relied on the information 
        described in subsection (a)(1), if the provider's network 
        status or directory information on such directory was incorrect 
        at the time the treatment or services involved was provided.
            ``(2) Refunds to enrollees.--If a health care provider 
        submits a bill to an enrollee in violation of paragraph (1), 
        and the enrollee pays such bill, the provider shall reimburse 
        the enrollee for the full amount paid by the enrollee in excess 
        of the in-network cost-sharing amount for the treatment or 
        services involved, plus interest, at an interest rate 
        determined by the Secretary.
    ``(c) Provider Business Processes.--A health care provider shall 
have in place business processes to ensure the timely provision of 
provider directory information to a group health plan or a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
to support compliance by such plans or issuers with subsection (a)(1). 
Such providers shall submit provider directory information to a plan or 
issuers, at a minimum--
            ``(1) when the provider begins a network agreement with a 
        plan or with an issuer with respect to certain coverage;
            ``(2) when the provider terminates a network agreement with 
        a plan or with an issuer with respect to certain coverage;
            ``(3) when there are material changes to the content of 
        provider directory information described in subsection (a)(1); 
        and
            ``(4) every 90 days throughout the duration of the network 
        agreement with a plan or issuer.
    ``(d) Enforcement.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a health care 
        provider that violates a requirement under subsection (c) or 
        takes actions that prevent a group health plan or health 
        insurance issuer from complying with subsection (a)(1) or (b) 
        shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than 
        $10,000 for each act constituting such violation.
            ``(2) Safe harbor.--The Secretary may waive the penalty 
        described under paragraph (1) with respect to a health care 
        provider that unknowingly violates subsection (b)(1) with 
        respect to an enrollee if such provider rescinds the bill 
        involved and, if applicable, reimburses the enrollee within 30 
        days of the date on which the provider billed the enrollee in 
        violation of such subsection.
            ``(3) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A of the 
        Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the 
        first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall 
        apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in the 
        same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
        under section 1128A of the Social Security Act.
    ``(e) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall prohibit a 
provider from requiring in the terms of a contract, or contract 
termination, with a group health plan or health insurance issuer--
            ``(1) that the plan or issuer remove, at the time of 
        termination of such contract, the provider from a directory of 
        the plan or issuer described in subsection (a)(1); or
            ``(2) that the plan or issuer bear financial 
        responsibility, including under subsection (b), for providing 
        inaccurate network status information to an enrollee.
    ``(f) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `provider 
directory information' includes the names, addresses, specialty, and 
telephone numbers of individual health care providers, and the names, 
addresses, and telephone numbers of each medical group, clinic, or 
facility contracted to participate in any of the networks of the group 
health plan or health insurance coverage involved.
    ``(g) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to preempt any provision of State law relating to health care 
provider directories or network adequacy.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2729C of the Public Health Service 
Act, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect with respect to plan 
years beginning on or after the date that is 18 months after the date 
of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 305. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.

    (a) In General.--
            (1) Amendment.--Part P of title III of the Public Health 
        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280g et seq.) is amended by adding at 
        the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-7. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall require--
            ``(1) health care facilities, or in the case of 
        practitioners providing services outside of such a facility, 
        practitioners, to provide to patients a list of services 
        rendered during the visit to such facility or practitioner, 
        and, in the case of a facility, the name of the provider for 
        each such service, upon discharge or end of the visit or by 
        postal or electronic communication as soon as practicable and 
        not later than 5 calendar days after discharge or date of 
        visit; and
            ``(2) health care facilities and practitioners to furnish 
        all adjudicated bills to the patient as soon as practicable, 
        but not later than 45 calendar days after discharge or date of 
        visit.
    ``(b) Payment After Billing.--No patient may be required to pay a 
bill for health care services any earlier than 35 days after the 
postmark date of a bill for such services.
    ``(c) Effect of Violation.--
            ``(1) Notification and refund requirements.--
                    ``(A) Provider lists.--If a facility or 
                practitioner fails to provide a patient a list as 
                required under subsection (a)(1), such facility or 
                practitioner shall report such failure to the 
                Secretary.
                    ``(B) Billing.--If a facility or practitioner bills 
                a patient after the 45-calendar-day period described in 
                subsection (a)(2), such facility or practitioner 
                shall--
                            ``(i) report such bill to the Secretary; 
                        and
                            ``(ii) refund the patient for the full 
                        amount paid in response to such bill with 
                        interest, at a rate determined by the 
                        Secretary.
            ``(2) Civil monetary penalties.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may impose civil 
                monetary penalties of up to $10,000 a day on any 
                facility or practitioner that--
                            ``(i) fails to provide a list required 
                        under subsection (a)(1) more than 10 times, 
                        beginning on the date of such tenth failure;
                            ``(ii) submits more than 10 bills outside 
                        of the period described in subsection (a)(2), 
                        beginning on the date on which such facility or 
                        practitioner sends the tenth such bill;
                            ``(iii) fails to report to the Secretary 
                        any failure to provide lists as required under 
                        paragraph (1)(A), beginning on the date that is 
                        45 calendar days after discharge or visit; or
                            ``(iv) fails to send any bill as required 
                        under subsection (a)(2), beginning on the date 
                        that is 45 calendar days after the date of 
                        discharge or visit, as applicable.
                    ``(B) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A 
                of the Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) 
                and (b) and the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of 
                such section, shall apply to civil money penalties 
                under this subsection in the same manner as such 
                provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under 
                section 1128A of the Social Security Act.
            ``(3) Safe harbor.--The Secretary may exempt a practitioner 
        or facility from the penalties under paragraph (2)(A) or extend 
        the period of time specified under subsection (a)(2) for 
        compliance with such subsection if a practitioner or facility--
                    ``(A) makes a good-faith attempt to send a bill 
                within 30 days but is unable to do so because of an 
                incorrect address; or
                    ``(B) experiences extenuating circumstances (as 
                defined by the Secretary), such as a hurricane or 
                cyberattack, that may reasonably delay delivery of a 
                timely bill.''.
            (2) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate final 
        regulations to define the term ``extenuating circumstance'' for 
        purposes of section 399V-7(c)(3)(B) of the Public Health 
        Service Act, as added by paragraph (1).
    (b) Group Health Plan and Health Insurance Issuer Requirements.--
Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300gg-11), as amended by section 304, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729D. TIMELY BILLS FOR PATIENTS.

    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or health insurance issuer 
offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall have in 
place business practices with respect to in-network facilities and 
practitioners to ensure that claims are adjudicated in order to 
facilitate facility and practitioner compliance with the requirements 
under section 399V-7(a).
    ``(b) Clarification.--Nothing in subsection (a) prohibits a 
provider and a group health plan or health insurance issuer from 
establishing in a contract the timeline for submission by either party 
to the other party of billing information, adjudication, sending of 
remittance information, or any other coordination required between the 
provider and the plan or issuer necessary for meeting the deadline 
described in section 399V-7(a)(2).''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall take effect 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 306. HEALTH PLAN OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGER SERVICES.

    Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by section 305(b), is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729E. HEALTH PLAN OVERSIGHT OF PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGER 
              SERVICES.

    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or health insurance issuer 
offering group health insurance coverage or an entity or subsidiary 
providing pharmacy benefits management services shall not enter into a 
contract with a drug manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler, 
subcontractor, rebate aggregator, or any associated third party that 
limits the disclosure of information to plan sponsors in such a manner 
that prevents the plan or coverage, or an entity or subsidiary 
providing pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a plan or 
coverage from making the reports described in subsection (b).
    ``(b) Reports to Group Plan Sponsors.--
            ``(1) In general.--Beginning with the first plan year that 
        begins after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care 
        Costs Act, not less frequently than once every 6 months, a 
        health insurance issuer offering group health insurance 
        coverage or an entity providing pharmacy benefits management 
        services on behalf of a group health plan shall submit to the 
        plan sponsor (as defined in section 3(16)(B) of the Employee 
        Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) of such group health 
        plan or health insurance coverage a report in accordance with 
        this subsection and make such report available to the plan 
        sponsor in a machine-readable format. Each such report shall 
        include, with respect to the applicable group health plan or 
        health insurance coverage--
                    ``(A) information collected from drug manufacturers 
                by such issuer or entity on the total amount of 
                copayment assistance dollars paid, or copayment cards 
                applied, that were funded by the drug manufacturer with 
                respect to the enrollees in such plan or coverage;
                    ``(B) a list of each covered drug dispensed during 
                the reporting period, including, with respect to each 
                such drug during the reporting period--
                            ``(i) the brand name, chemical entity, and 
                        National Drug Code;
                            ``(ii) the number of enrollees for whom the 
                        drug was filled during the plan year, the total 
                        number of prescription fills for the drug 
                        (including original prescriptions and refills), 
                        and the total number of dosage units of the 
                        drug dispensed across the plan year, including 
                        whether the dispensing channel was by retail, 
                        mail order, or specialty pharmacy;
                            ``(iii) the wholesale acquisition cost, 
                        listed as cost per days supply and cost per 
                        pill, or in the case of a drug in another form, 
                        per dose;
                            ``(iv) the total out-of-pocket spending by 
                        enrollees on such drug, including enrollee 
                        spending through copayments, coinsurance, and 
                        deductibles;
                            ``(v) for any drug for which gross spending 
                        of the group health plan or health insurance 
                        coverage exceeded $10,000 during the reporting 
                        period--
                                    ``(I) a list of all other available 
                                drugs in the same therapeutic category 
                                or class, including brand name drugs 
                                and biological products and generic 
                                drugs or biosimilar biological products 
                                that are in the same therapeutic 
                                category or class; and
                                    ``(II) the rationale for preferred 
                                formulary placement of a particular 
                                drug or drugs in that therapeutic 
                                category or class;
                    ``(C) a list of each therapeutic category or class 
                of drugs that were dispensed under the health plan or 
                health insurance coverage during the reporting period, 
                and, with respect to each such therapeutic category or 
                class of drugs, during the reporting period--
                            ``(i) total gross spending by the plan, 
                        before manufacturer rebates, fees, or other 
                        manufacturer remuneration;
                            ``(ii) the number of enrollees who filled a 
                        prescription for a drug in that category or 
                        class;
                            ``(iii) if applicable to that category or 
                        class, a description of the formulary tiers and 
                        utilization mechanisms (such as prior 
                        authorization or step therapy) employed for 
                        drugs in that category or class;
                            ``(iv) the total out-of-pocket spending by 
                        enrollees, including enrollee spending through 
                        copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles; and
                            ``(v) for each therapeutic category or 
                        class under which 3 or more drugs are included 
                        on the formulary of such plan or coverage--
                                    ``(I) the amount received, or 
                                expected to be received, from drug 
                                manufacturers in rebates, fees, 
                                alternative discounts, or other 
                                remuneration--
                                            ``(aa) to be paid by drug 
                                        manufacturers for claims 
                                        incurred during the reporting 
                                        period; or
                                            ``(bb) that is related to 
                                        utilization of drugs, in such 
                                        therapeutic category or class;
                                    ``(II) the total net spending, 
                                after deducting rebates, price 
                                concessions, alternative discounts or 
                                other remuneration from drug 
                                manufacturers, by the health plan or 
                                health insurance coverage on that 
                                category or class of drugs; and
                                    ``(III) the net price per course of 
                                treatment or 30-day supply incurred by 
                                the health plan or health insurance 
                                coverage and its enrollees, after 
                                manufacturer rebates, fees, and other 
                                remuneration for drugs dispensed within 
                                such therapeutic category or class 
                                during the reporting period;
                    ``(D) total gross spending on prescription drugs by 
                the plan or coverage during the reporting period, 
                before rebates and other manufacturer fees or 
                remuneration;
                    ``(E) total amount received, or expected to be 
                received, by the health plan or health insurance 
                coverage in drug manufacturer rebates, fees, 
                alternative discounts, and all other remuneration 
                received from the manufacturer or any third party, 
                other than the plan sponsor, related to utilization of 
                drug or drug spending under that health plan or health 
                insurance coverage during the reporting period;
                    ``(F) the total net spending on prescription drugs 
                by the health plan or health insurance coverage during 
                the reporting period; and
                    ``(G) amounts paid directly or indirectly in 
                rebates, fees, or any other type of remuneration to 
                brokers, consultants, advisors, or any other individual 
                or firm who referred the group health plan's or health 
                insurance issuer's business to the pharmacy benefit 
                manager.
            ``(2) Privacy requirements.--Health insurance issuers 
        offering group health insurance coverage and entities providing 
        pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a group 
        health plan shall provide information under paragraph (1) in a 
        manner consistent with the privacy, security, and breach 
        notification regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of 
        the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
        (or successor regulations), and shall restrict the use and 
        disclosure of such information according to such privacy 
        regulations.
            ``(3) Disclosure and redisclosure.--
                    ``(A) Limitation to business associates.--A group 
                health plan receiving a report under paragraph (1) may 
                disclose such information only to business associates 
                of such plan as defined in section 160.103 of title 45, 
                Code of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
                    ``(B) Clarification regarding public disclosure of 
                information.--Nothing in this section prevents a health 
                insurance issuer offering group health insurance 
                coverage or an entity providing pharmacy benefits 
                management services on behalf of a group health plan 
                from placing reasonable restrictions on the public 
                disclosure of the information contained in a report 
                described in paragraph (1), except that such issuer or 
                entity may not restrict disclosure of such report to 
                governmental agencies pursuant to an investigation or 
                enforcement action.
                    ``(C) Limited form of report.--The Secretary shall 
                define through rulemaking a limited form of the report 
                under paragraph (1) required of plan sponsors who are 
                drug manufacturers, drug wholesalers, or other direct 
                participants in the drug supply chain, in order to 
                prevent anti-competitive behavior.
    ``(c) Limitations on Spread Pricing.--
            ``(1) Prescription drug transactions with pharmacies 
        independent of the issuer or pharmacy benefits manager.--If the 
        pharmacy that dispenses a prescription drug to an enrollee in a 
        group health plan or group or individual health insurance 
        coverage is not wholly or partially-owned by such plan, such 
        issuer, or an entity providing pharmacy benefit management 
        services under such plan or coverage, such plan, issuer, or 
        entity shall not charge the plan, issuer, or enrollee a price 
        for such prescription drug that exceeds the price paid to the 
        pharmacy, excluding penalties paid by pharmacies to such plan, 
        issuer, or entity.
            ``(2) Intra-company prescription drug transactions.--If the 
        mail order, specialty, or retail pharmacy that dispenses a 
        prescription drug to an enrollee in a group health plan or 
        health insurance coverage is wholly or partially owned by, and 
        submits claims to, such health insurance issuer or an entity 
        providing pharmacy benefit management services under a group 
        health plan or group or individual health insurance coverage, 
        the price charged for such drug by such pharmacy to such group 
        health plan or health insurance issuer offering group or 
        individual health insurance coverage may not exceed the lesser 
        of--
                    ``(A) the amount paid to the pharmacy for 
                acquisition of the drug; or
                    ``(B) the median price charged to the group health 
                plan or health insurance issuer when the same drug is 
                dispensed to enrollees in the plan or coverage by other 
                similarly-situated pharmacies not wholly or partially 
                owned by the health insurance issuer or entity 
                providing pharmacy benefits management services, as 
                described in paragraph (1).
            ``(3) Supplementary reporting for intra-company 
        prescription drug transactions.--A health insurance issuer of 
        group health insurance coverage or an entity providing pharmacy 
        benefits management services under a group health plan or group 
        health insurance coverage that conducts transactions with a 
        wholly or partially-owned pharmacy, as described in paragraph 
        (2), shall submit, together with the report under subsection 
        (b), a supplementary report every 6 months to the plan sponsor 
        that includes--
                    ``(A) an explanation of any benefit design 
                parameters that encourage enrollees in the plan or 
                coverage to fill prescriptions at mail order, 
                specialty, or retail pharmacies that are wholly or 
                partially-owned by that issuer or entity;
                    ``(B) the percentage of total prescriptions charged 
                to the plan, coverage, or enrollees in the plan or 
                coverage, that were dispensed by mail order, specialty, 
                or retail pharmacies that are wholly or partially-owned 
                by the issuer or entity providing pharmacy benefits 
                management services; and
                    ``(C) a list of all drugs dispensed by such wholly 
                or partially-owned pharmacy and charged to the plan or 
                coverage, or enrollees of the plan or coverage, during 
                the applicable quarter, and, with respect to each 
                drug--
                            ``(i) the amount charged per course of 
                        treatment or 30-day supply with respect to 
                        enrollees in the plan or coverage, including 
                        amounts charged to the plan or coverage and 
                        amounts charged to the enrollee;
                            ``(ii) the median amount charged to the 
                        plan or coverage, per course of treatment or 
                        30-day supply, including amounts paid by the 
                        enrollee, when the same drug is dispensed by 
                        other pharmacies that are not wholly or 
                        partially-owned by the issuer or entity and 
                        that are included in the pharmacy network of 
                        that plan or coverage;
                            ``(iii) the interquartile range of the 
                        costs, per course of treatment or 30-day 
                        supply, including amounts paid by the enrollee, 
                        when the same drug is dispensed by other 
                        pharmacies that are not wholly or partially-
                        owned by the issuer or entity and that are 
                        included in the pharmacy network of that plan 
                        or coverage;
                            ``(iv) the lowest cost per course of 
                        treatment or 30-day supply, for such drug, 
                        including amounts charged to the plan or issuer 
                        and enrollee, that is available from any 
                        pharmacy included in the network of the plan or 
                        coverage.
    ``(d) Full Rebate Pass-through to Plan.--
            ``(1) In general.--A pharmacy benefits manager, a third-
        party administrator of a group health plan, a health insurance 
        issuer offering group health insurance coverage, or an entity 
        providing pharmacy benefits management services under such 
        health plan or health insurance coverage shall remit 100 
        percent of rebates, fees, alternative discounts, and all other 
        remuneration received from a pharmaceutical manufacturer, 
        distributor or any other third party, that are related to 
        utilization of drugs under such health plan or health insurance 
        coverage, to the group health plan.
            ``(2) Form and manner of remittance.--Such rebates, fees, 
        alternative discounts, and other remuneration shall be--
                    ``(A) remitted to the group health plan in a timely 
                fashion after the period for which such rebates, fees, 
                or other remuneration is calculated, and in no case 
                later than 90 days after the end of such period;
                    ``(B) fully disclosed and enumerated to the group 
                health plan sponsor, as described in (b)(1);
                    ``(C) available for audit by the plan sponsor, or a 
                third-party designated by a plan sponsor no less than 
                once per plan year; and
                    ``(D) returned to the issuer or entity providing 
                pharmaceutical benefit management services by the group 
                health plan if audits by such issuer or entity indicate 
                that the amounts received are incorrect after such 
                amounts have been paid to the group health plan.
            ``(3) Audit of rebate contracts.--A pharmacy benefits 
        manager, a third-party administrator of a group health plan, a 
        health insurance issuer offering group health insurance 
        coverage, or an entity providing pharmacy benefits management 
        services under such health plan or health insurance coverage 
        shall make rebate contracts with drug manufacturers available 
        for audit by such plan sponsor or designated third-party, 
        subject to confidentiality agreements to prevent re-disclosure 
        of such contracts.
    ``(e) Enforcement.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
        Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of the Treasury, shall 
        enforce this section.
            ``(2) Failure to provide timely information.--A health 
        insurance issuer or an entity providing pharmacy benefit 
        management services that violates subsection (a), fails to 
        provide information required under subsection (b), engages in 
        spread pricing as defined in subsection (c), or fails to comply 
        with the requirements of subsection (d), or a drug manufacturer 
        that fails to provide information under subsection (b)(1)(A), 
        in a timely manner shall be subject to a civil monetary penalty 
        in the amount of $10,000 for each day during which such 
        violation continues or such information is not disclosed or 
        reported.
            ``(3) False information.--A health insurance issuer, entity 
        providing pharmacy benefit management services, or drug 
        manufacturer that knowingly provides false information under 
        this section shall be subject to a civil money penalty in an 
        amount not to exceed $100,000 for each item of false 
        information. Such civil money penalty shall be in addition to 
        other penalties as may be prescribed by law.
            ``(4) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A of the 
        Social Security Act, other than subsection (a) and (b) and the 
        first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section shall apply 
        to civil monetary penalties under this subsection in the same 
        manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
        under section 1128A of the Social Security Act.
            ``(5) Safe harbor.--The Secretary may waive penalties under 
        paragraph (2), or extend the period of time for compliance with 
        a requirement of this section, for an entity in violation of 
        this section that has made a good-faith effort to comply with 
        this section.
    ``(f) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prohibit payments to entities offering pharmacy benefits 
management services for bona fide services using a fee structure not 
contemplated by this section, provided that such fees are transparent 
to group health plans and health insurance issuers.
    ``(g) Definitions.--In this section--
            ``(1) the term `similarly situated pharmacy' means, with 
        respect to a particular pharmacy, another pharmacy that is 
        approximately the same size (as measured by the number of 
        prescription drugs dispensed), and that serves patients in the 
        same geographical area, whether through physical locations or 
        mail order; and
            ``(2) the term `wholesale acquisition cost' has the meaning 
        given such term in sectionb1847A(c)(6)(B) of the Social 
        Security Act.''.

SEC. 307. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE STUDY ON PROFIT- AND 
              REVENUE-SHARING IN HEALTH CARE.

    (a) Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a 
study to--
            (1) describe what is known about profit- and revenue-
        sharing relationships in the commercial health care markets, 
        including those relationships that--
                    (A) involve one or more--
                            (i) physician groups that practice within a 
                        hospital included in the profit- or revenue-
                        sharing relationship, or refer patients to such 
                        hospital;
                            (ii) laboratory, radiology, or pharmacy 
                        services that are delivered to privately 
                        insured patients of such hospital;
                            (iii) surgical services;
                            (iv) hospitals or group purchasing 
                        organizations; or
                            (v) rehabilitation or physical therapy 
                        facilities or services; and
                    (B) include revenue- or profit-sharing whether 
                through a joint venture, management or professional 
                services agreement, or other form of gain-sharing 
                contract;
            (2) describe Federal oversight of such relationships, 
        including authorities of the Department of Health and Human 
        Services and the Federal Trade Commission to review such 
        relationships and their potential to increase costs for 
        patients, and identify limitations in such oversight; and
            (3) as appropriate, make recommendations to improve Federal 
        oversight of such relationships.
    (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall prepare 
and submit a report on the study conducted under subsection (a) to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and 
the Committee on Education and Labor and Committee on Energy and 
Commerce of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 308. DISCLOSURE OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT COMPENSATION FOR BROKERS 
              AND CONSULTANTS TO EMPLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTH PLANS AND 
              ENROLLEES IN PLANS ON THE INDIVIDUAL MARKET.

    (a) Group Health Plans.--Section 408(b)(2) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(2)) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking ``(2) Contracting or making'' and inserting 
        ``(2)(A) Contracting or making''; and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(B)(i) No contract or arrangement for services between a 
        covered plan and a covered service provider, and no extension 
        or renewal of such a contract or arrangement, is reasonable 
        within the meaning of this paragraph unless the requirements of 
        this clause are met.
            ``(ii)(I) For purposes of this subparagraph:
                    ``(aa) The term `covered plan' means a group health 
                plan as defined section 733(a).
                    ``(bb) The term `covered service provider' means a 
                service provider that enters into a contract or 
                arrangement with the covered plan and reasonably 
                expects $1,000 (or such amount as the Secretary may 
                establish in regulations to account for inflation since 
                the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs 
                Act, as appropriate) or more in compensation, direct or 
                indirect, to be received in connection with providing 
                one or more of the following services, pursuant to the 
                contract or arrangement, regardless of whether such 
                services will be performed, or such compensation 
                received, by the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor:
                            ``(AA) Brokerage services, for which the 
                        covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                        subcontractor reasonably expects to receive 
                        indirect compensation or direct compensation 
                        described in item (dd), provided to a covered 
                        plan with respect to selection of insurance 
                        products (including vision and dental), 
                        recordkeeping services, medical management 
                        vendor, benefits administration (including 
                        vision and dental), stop-loss insurance, 
                        pharmacy benefit management services, wellness 
                        services, transparency tools and vendors, group 
                        purchasing organization preferred vendor 
                        panels, disease management vendors and 
                        products, compliance services, employee 
                        assistance programs, or third party 
                        administration services.
                            ``(BB) Consulting, for which the covered 
                        service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                        subcontractor reasonably expects to receive 
                        indirect compensation or direct compensation 
                        described in item (dd), related to the 
                        development or implementation of plan design, 
                        insurance or insurance product selection 
                        (including vision and dental), recordkeeping, 
                        medical management, benefits administration 
                        selection (including vision and dental), stop-
                        loss insurance, pharmacy benefit management 
                        services, wellness design and management 
                        services, transparency tools, group purchasing 
                        organization agreements and services, 
                        participation in and services from preferred 
                        vendor panels, disease management, compliance 
                        services, employee assistance programs, or 
                        third party administration services.
                    ``(cc) The term `affiliate', with respect to a 
                covered service provider, means an entity that directly 
                or indirectly (through one or more intermediaries) 
                controls, is controlled by, or is under common control 
                with, such provider, or is an officer, director, or 
                employee of, or partner in, such provider.
                    ``(dd)(AA) The term `compensation' means anything 
                of monetary value, but does not include non-monetary 
                compensation valued at $250 (or such amount as the 
                Secretary may establish in regulations to account for 
                inflation since the date of enactment of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act, as appropriate) or less, in the 
                aggregate, during the term of the contract or 
                arrangement.
                    ``(BB) The term `direct compensation' means 
                compensation received directly from a covered plan.
                    ``(CC) The term `indirect compensation' means 
                compensation received from any source other than the 
                covered plan, the plan sponsor, the covered service 
                provider, or an affiliate. Compensation received from a 
                subcontractor is indirect compensation, unless it is 
                received in connection with services performed under a 
                contract or arrangement with a subcontractor.
                    ``(ee) The term `responsible plan fiduciary' means 
                a fiduciary with authority to cause the covered plan to 
                enter into, or extend or renew, the contract or 
                arrangement.
                    ``(ff) The term `subcontractor' means any person or 
                entity (or an affiliate of such person or entity) that 
                is not an affiliate of the covered service provider and 
                that, pursuant to a contract or arrangement with the 
                covered service provider or an affiliate, reasonably 
                expects to receive $1,000 (or such amount as the 
                Secretary may establish in regulations to account for 
                inflation since the date of enactment of the Lower 
                Health Care Costs Act, as appropriate) or more in 
                compensation for performing one or more services 
                described in item (bb) under a contract or arrangement 
                with the covered plan.
            ``(II) For purposes of this subparagraph, a description of 
        compensation or cost may be expressed as a monetary amount, 
        formula, or a per capita charge for each enrollee or, if the 
        compensation or cost cannot reasonably be expressed in such 
        terms, by any other reasonable method, including a disclosure 
        that additional compensation may be earned but may not be 
        calculated at the time of contract if such a disclosure 
        includes a description of the circumstances under which the 
        additional compensation may be earned and a reasonable and good 
        faith estimate if the covered service provider cannot otherwise 
        readily describe compensation or cost and explains the 
        methodology and assumptions used to prepare such estimate. Any 
        such description shall contain sufficient information to permit 
        evaluation of the reasonableness of the compensation or cost.
            ``(III) No person or entity is a `covered service provider' 
        within the meaning of subclause (I)(bb) solely on the basis of 
        providing services as an affiliate or a subcontractor that is 
        performing one or more of the services described in subitem 
        (AA) or (BB) of such subclause under the contract or 
        arrangement with the covered plan.
            ``(iii) A covered service provider shall disclose to a 
        responsible plan fiduciary, in writing, the following:
                    ``(I) A description of the services to be provided 
                to the covered plan pursuant to the contract or 
                arrangement.
                    ``(II) If applicable, a statement that the covered 
                service provider, an affiliate, or a subcontractor will 
                provide, or reasonably expects to provide, services 
                pursuant to the contract or arrangement directly to the 
                covered plan as a fiduciary (within the meaning of 
                section 3(21)).
                    ``(III) A description of all direct compensation, 
                either in the aggregate or by service, that the covered 
                service provider, an affiliate, or a subcontractor 
                reasonably expects to receive in connection with the 
                services described in subclause (I).
                    ``(IV)(aa) A description of all indirect 
                compensation that the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor reasonably expects to 
                receive in connection with the services described in 
                subclause (I)--
                            ``(AA) including compensation from a vendor 
                        to a brokerage firm based on a structure of 
                        incentives not solely related to the contract 
                        with the covered plan; and
                            ``(BB) not including compensation received 
                        by an employee from an employer on account of 
                        work performed by the employee.
                    ``(bb) A description of the arrangement between the 
                payer and the covered service provider, an affiliate, 
                or a subcontractor, as applicable, pursuant to which 
                such indirect compensation is paid.
                    ``(cc) Identification of the services for which the 
                indirect compensation will be received, if applicable.
                    ``(dd) Identification of the payer of the indirect 
                compensation.
                    ``(V) A description of any compensation that will 
                be paid among the covered service provider, an 
                affiliate, or a subcontractor, in connection with the 
                services described in subclause (I) if such 
                compensation is set on a transaction basis (such as 
                commissions, finder's fees, or other similar incentive 
                compensation based on business placed or retained), 
                including identification of the services for which such 
                compensation will be paid and identification of the 
                payers and recipients of such compensation (including 
                the status of a payer or recipient as an affiliate or a 
                subcontractor), regardless of whether such compensation 
                also is disclosed pursuant to subclause (III) or (IV).
                    ``(VI) A description of any compensation that the 
                covered service provider, an affiliate, or a 
                subcontractor reasonably expects to receive in 
                connection with termination of the contract or 
                arrangement, and how any prepaid amounts will be 
                calculated and refunded upon such termination.
            ``(iv) A covered service provider shall disclose to a 
        responsible plan fiduciary, in writing a description of the 
        manner in which the compensation described in clause (iii), as 
        applicable, will be received.
            ``(v)(I) A covered service provider shall disclose the 
        information required under clauses (iii) and (iv) to the 
        responsible plan fiduciary not later than the date that is 
        reasonably in advance of the date on which the contract or 
        arrangement is entered into, and extended or renewed.
            ``(II) A covered service provider shall disclose any change 
        to the information required under clause (iii) and (iv) as soon 
        as practicable, but not later than 60 days from the date on 
        which the covered service provider is informed of such change, 
        unless such disclosure is precluded due to extraordinary 
        circumstances beyond the covered service provider's control, in 
        which case the information shall be disclosed as soon as 
        practicable.
            ``(vi)(I) Upon the written request of the responsible plan 
        fiduciary or covered plan administrator, a covered service 
        provider shall furnish any other information relating to the 
        compensation received in connection with the contract or 
        arrangement that is required for the covered plan to comply 
        with the reporting and disclosure requirements under this Act.
            ``(II) The covered service provider shall disclose the 
        information required under clause (iii)(I) reasonably in 
        advance of the date upon which such responsible plan fiduciary 
        or covered plan administrator states that it is required to 
        comply with the applicable reporting or disclosure requirement, 
        unless such disclosure is precluded due to extraordinary 
        circumstances beyond the covered service provider's control, in 
        which case the information shall be disclosed as soon as 
        practicable.
            ``(vii) No contract or arrangement will fail to be 
        reasonable under this subparagraph solely because the covered 
        service provider, acting in good faith and with reasonable 
        diligence, makes an error or omission in disclosing the 
        information required pursuant to clause (iii) (or a change to 
        such information disclosed pursuant to clause (v)(II)) or 
        clause (vi), provided that the covered service provider 
        discloses the correct information to the responsible plan 
        fiduciary as soon as practicable, but not later than 30 days 
        from the date on which the covered service provider knows of 
        such error or omission.
            ``(viii)(I) Pursuant to subsection (a), subparagraphs (C) 
        and (D) of section 406(a)(1) shall not apply to a responsible 
        plan fiduciary, notwithstanding any failure by a covered 
        service provider to disclose information required under clause 
        (iii), if the following conditions are met:
                    ``(aa) The responsible plan fiduciary did not know 
                that the covered service provider failed or would fail 
                to make required disclosures and reasonably believed 
                that the covered service provider disclosed the 
                information required to be disclosed.
                    ``(bb) The responsible plan fiduciary, upon 
                discovering that the covered service provider failed to 
                disclose the required information, requests in writing 
                that the covered service provider furnish such 
                information.
                    ``(cc) If the covered service provider fails to 
                comply with a written request described in subclause 
                (II) within 90 days of the request, the responsible 
                plan fiduciary notifies the Secretary of the covered 
                service provider's failure, in accordance with 
                subclauses (II) and (III).
            ``(II) A notice described in subclause (I)(cc) shall 
        contain--
                    ``(aa) the name of the covered plan;
                    ``(bb) the plan number used for the annual report 
                on the covered plan;
                    ``(cc) the plan sponsor's name, address, and 
                employer identification number;
                    ``(dd) the name, address, and telephone number of 
                the responsible plan fiduciary;
                    ``(ee) the name, address, phone number, and, if 
                known, employer identification number of the covered 
                service provider;
                    ``(ff) a description of the services provided to 
                the covered plan;
                    ``(gg) a description of the information that the 
                covered service provider failed to disclose;
                    ``(hh) the date on which such information was 
                requested in writing from the covered service provider; 
                and
                    ``(ii) a statement as to whether the covered 
                service provider continues to provide services to the 
                plan.
            ``(III) A notice described in subclause (I)(cc) shall be 
        filed with the Department not later than 30 days following the 
        earlier of--
                    ``(aa) The covered service provider's refusal to 
                furnish the information requested by the written 
                request described in subclause (I)(bb); or
                    ``(bb) 90 days after the written request referred 
                to in subclause (I)(cc) is made.
            ``(IV) If the covered service provider fails to comply with 
        the written request under subclause (I)(bb) within 90 days of 
        such request, the responsible plan fiduciary shall determine 
        whether to terminate or continue the contract or arrangement 
        under section 404. If the requested information relates to 
        future services and is not disclosed promptly after the end of 
        the 90-day period, the responsible plan fiduciary shall 
        terminate the contract or arrangement as expeditiously as 
        possible, consistent with such duty of prudence.
            ``(ix) Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to 
        supersede any provision of State law that governs disclosures 
        by parties that provide the services described in this section, 
        except to the extent that such law prevents the application of 
        a requirement of this section.''.
    (b) Applicability of Existing Regulations.--Nothing in the 
amendments made by subsection (a) shall be construed to affect the 
applicability of section 2550.408b-2 of title 29, Code of Federal 
Regulations (or any successor regulations), with respect to any 
applicable entity other than a covered plan or a covered service 
provider (as defined in section 408(b)(2)(B)(ii) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by subsection (a)).
    (c) Individual Market Coverage.--Subpart 1 of part B of title XXVII 
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-41 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2746. DISCLOSURE TO ENROLLEES OF INDIVIDUAL MARKET COVERAGE.

    ``(a) In General.--A health insurance issuer offering individual 
health insurance coverage shall make disclosures to enrollees in such 
coverage, as described in subsection (b), and reports to the Secretary, 
as described in subsection (c), regarding direct or indirect 
compensation provided to an agent or broker associated with enrolling 
individuals in such coverage.
    ``(b) Disclosure.--A health insurance issuer described in 
subsection (a) shall disclose to an enrollee the amount of direct or 
indirect compensation provided to an agent or broker for services 
provided by such agent or broker associated with plan selection and 
enrollment. Such disclosure shall be--
            ``(1) made prior to the individual finalizing plan 
        selection; and
            ``(2) included on any documentation confirming the 
        individual's enrollment.
    ``(c) Reporting.--A health insurance issuer described in subsection 
(a) shall annually report to the Secretary, prior to the beginning of 
open enrollment, any direct or indirect compensation provided to an 
agent or broker associated with enrolling individuals in such coverage.
    ``(d) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the Secretary shall 
finalize, through notice-and-comment rulemaking, the form and manner in 
which issuers described in subsection (a) are required to make the 
disclosures described in subsection (b) and the reports described in 
subsection (c).''.
    (d) Transition Rule.--No contract executed prior to the effective 
date described in subsection (e) by a group health plan subject to the 
requirements of section 408(b)(2)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (as amended by subsection (a)) or by a health 
insurance issuer subject to the requirements of section 2746 of the 
Public Health Service Act (as added by subsection (c)) shall be subject 
to the requirements of such section 408( b)(2)(B) or such section 2746, 
as applicable.
    (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (c) 
shall take effect 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 309. ENSURING ENROLLEE ACCESS TO COST-SHARING INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--Subpart II of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-11 et seq.), as amended by section 
306, is further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2729F. PROVISION OF COST-SHARING INFORMATION.

    ``(a) Provider Disclosures.--A provider that is in-network with 
respect to a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering 
group or individual health insurance coverage shall provide to an 
enrollee in the plan or coverage who submits a request for the 
information described in paragraph (1) or (2), together with accurate 
and complete information about the enrollee's coverage under the 
applicable plan or coverage--
            ``(1) as soon as practicable and not later than 2 business 
        days after the enrollee requests such information, a good faith 
        estimate of the expected enrollee cost-sharing for the 
        provision of a particular health care service (including any 
        service that is reasonably expected to be provided in 
        conjunction with such specific service); and
            ``(2) as soon as practicable and not later than 2 business 
        days after an enrollee requests such information, the contact 
        information for any ancillary providers for a scheduled health 
        care service.
    ``(b) Insurer Disclosures.--A group health plan or a health 
insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage 
shall provide an enrollee in the plan or coverage with a good faith 
estimate of the enrollee's cost-sharing (including deductibles, 
copayments, and coinsurance) for which the enrollee would be 
responsible for paying with respect to a specific health care service 
(including any service that is reasonably expected to be provided in 
conjunction with such specific service), as soon as practicable and not 
later than 2 business days after a request for such information by an 
enrollee.
    ``(c) Enforcement.--
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a health care 
        provider that violates a requirement under subsection (a) shall 
        be subject to a civil monetary penalty of not more than $10,000 
        for each act constituting such violation.
            ``(2) Procedure.--The provisions of section 1128A of the 
        Social Security Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and the 
        first sentence of subsection (c)(1) of such section, shall 
        apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in the 
        same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
        under section 1128A of the Social Security Act.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2729G of the Public Health Service 
Act, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to plan years 
beginning on or after the date that is 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 310. STRENGTHENING PARITY IN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE 
              DISORDER BENEFITS.

    Section 2726 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-26) 
is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
            ``(8) Compliance requirements.--
                    ``(A) Nonquantitative treatment limitation (nqtl) 
                requirements.--In the case of a group health plan or a 
                health insurance issuer offering group or individual 
                health insurance coverage that provides both medical 
                and surgical benefits and mental health or substance 
                use disorder benefits and that imposes nonquantitative 
                treatment limitations (referred to in this section as 
                `NQTL') on mental health or substance use disorder 
                benefits, the plan or issuer offering health insurance 
                coverage in connection with such a plan, shall perform 
                comparative analyses of the design and application of 
                NQTLs in accordance with the following process, and 
                make available to the applicable State authority (or, 
                as applicable, to the Secretary of Labor with respect 
                to group health plans or the Secretary of Health and 
                Human Services with respect to health insurance 
                coverage), upon request within 60 days beginning 6 
                months after the date of enactment of the Lower Health 
                Care Costs Act, the following information:
                            ``(i) The specific plan or coverage terms 
                        regarding the NQTL, that applies to such plan 
                        or coverage, and a description of all mental 
                        health or substance use disorder and medical or 
                        surgical benefits to which it applies in each 
                        respective benefits classification.
                            ``(ii) The factors used to determine that 
                        the NQTL will apply to mental health or 
                        substance use disorder benefits and medical or 
                        surgical benefits.
                            ``(iii) The evidentiary standards used for 
                        the factors identified in clause (ii), when 
                        applicable, provided that every factor shall be 
                        defined and any other source or evidence relied 
                        upon to design and apply the NQTL to mental 
                        health or substance use disorder benefits and 
                        medical or surgical benefits.
                            ``(iv) The comparative analyses 
                        demonstrating that the processes, strategies, 
                        evidentiary standards, and other factors used 
                        to design the NQTL, as written, and the 
                        operation processes and strategies as written 
                        and in operation that are used to apply the 
                        NQTL for mental health or substance use 
                        disorder benefits are comparable to, and are 
                        applied no more stringently than, the 
                        processes, strategies, evidentiary standards, 
                        and other factors used to design the NQTL, as 
                        written, and the operation processes and 
                        strategies as written and in operation that are 
                        used to apply the NQTL to medical or surgical 
                        benefits.
                            ``(v) A disclosure of the specific findings 
                        and conclusions reached by the plan or coverage 
                        that the results of the analyses described in 
                        this subparagraph indicate that the plan or 
                        coverage is in compliance with this section.
                    ``(B) Secretary request process.--
                            ``(i) Submission upon request.--With 
                        respect to group health plans or health 
                        insurance coverage for which the Secretary is 
                        enforcing this section in accordance with 
                        section 2723, the Secretary, in consultation 
                        with the Secretary of Labor and the Secretary 
                        of Treasury, shall request that a group health 
                        plan or a health insurance issuer offering 
                        group or individual health insurance coverage 
                        submit the comparative analyses described in 
                        subparagraph (A) for plans that involve 
                        potential violations of this section concerning 
                        NQTLs and any other instances in which the 
                        Secretary determines appropriate. The Secretary 
                        shall request not fewer than 20 such analyses 
                        per year.
                            ``(ii) Additional information.--In 
                        instances in which the Secretary has concluded 
                        that the plan or coverage has not submitted 
                        sufficient information for the Secretary to 
                        review the comparative analyses described in 
                        subparagraph (A), as requested under clause 
                        (i), the Secretary shall specify to the plan or 
                        coverage the information the plan or coverage 
                        must submit to be responsive to the request 
                        under clause (i) for the Secretary to review 
                        the comparative analyses described in 
                        subparagraph(A) for compliance with this 
                        section. Nothing in this paragraph shall 
                        require the Secretary to conclude that a plan 
                        is in compliance with this section solely based 
                        upon the inspection of the comparative analyses 
                        described in subparagraph (A), as requested 
                        under clause (i).
                            ``(iii) Required action.--In instances in 
                        which the Secretary has reviewed the 
                        comparative analyses described in subparagraph 
                        (A), as requested under clause (i), and 
                        determined that the plan or coverage is not in 
                        compliance with this section, the plan or 
                        coverage shall specify to the Secretary the 
                        actions the plan or coverage will take to be in 
                        compliance with this section. Documents or 
                        communications produced in connection with the 
                        Secretary's recommendations to the plan or 
                        coverage shall not be subject to disclosure 
                        pursuant to section 552 of title 5, United 
                        States Code.
                            ``(iv) Report.--Not later than 1 year after 
                        the date of enactment of this paragraph, and 
                        annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit 
                        to the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
                        House of Representatives and the Committee on 
                        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
                        Senate a report that contains--
                                    ``(I) a summary of the comparative 
                                analyses requested under clause (i), 
                                except that the identity of each plan 
                                or coverage and any contracted entity 
                                of a plan or coverage shall be 
                                redacted;
                                    ``(II) the Secretary's conclusions 
                                as to whether each plan or coverage 
                                submitted sufficient information for 
                                the Secretary to review the comparative 
                                analyses requested under clause (i) for 
                                compliance with this section;
                                    ``(III) for each plan or coverage 
                                that did submit sufficient information 
                                for the Secretary to review the 
                                comparative analyses requested under 
                                clause (i), the Secretary's conclusions 
                                as to whether and why the plan or 
                                coverage is in compliance with the 
                                disclosure requirements under this 
                                section;
                                    ``(IV) the Secretary's 
                                specifications described in clause (ii) 
                                for each plan or coverage that the 
                                Secretary determined did not submit 
                                sufficient information for the 
                                Secretary to review the comparative 
                                analyses requested under clause (i) for 
                                compliance with this section; and
                                    ``(V) the Secretary's 
                                specifications described in clause 
                                (iii) of the actions each plan or 
                                coverage that the Secretary determined 
                                is not in compliance with this section 
                                must take to be in compliance with this 
                                section, including the reason why the 
                                Secretary determined the plan or 
                                coverage is not in compliance.
                    ``(C) Compliance program guidance document update 
                process.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
                        include select instances of noncompliance that 
                        the Secretary discovers upon reviewing the 
                        comparative analyses requested under 
                        subparagraph (B)(i) in the compliance program 
                        guidance document described in section 
                        2726(a)(6), as it is updated every 2 years, 
                        except that all instances shall be deidentified 
                        and such instances shall not disclose any 
                        protected health information or individually 
                        identifiable information.
                            ``(ii) Guidance and regulations.--Not later 
                        than 18 months after the date of enactment of 
                        this paragraph, the Secretary shall finalize 
                        any draft or interim guidance and regulations 
                        relating to mental health parity under this 
                        section.
                            ``(iii) State.--The Secretary shall share 
                        information on findings of compliance and 
                        noncompliance discovered upon reviewing the 
                        comparative analyses requested under 
                        subparagraph (B)(i) shall be shared with the 
                        State where the group health plan is located or 
                        the State where the health insurance issuer is 
                        licensed to do business for coverage offered by 
                        a health insurance issuer in the group market, 
                        in accordance with section 
                        2726(a)(6)(B)(iii)(II).''.

SEC. 311. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.

    (a) ERISA.--Section 715 of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185d) is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``(as amended by the 
        Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and inserting 
        ``(including any subsequent amendments to such part)''; and
            (2) in subsection (b)--
                    (A) by striking ``(as amended by the Patient 
                Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and inserting 
                ``(including any subsequent amendments to such part)''; 
                and
                    (B) by striking ``(as so amended)''.
    (b) IRC.--Section 9815 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended--
            (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``(as amended by the 
        Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and inserting 
        ``(including any subsequent amendments to such part)''; and
            (2) in subsection (b)--
                    (A) by striking ``(as amended by the Patient 
                Protection and Affordable Care Act)'' and inserting 
                ``(including any subsequent amendments to such part)''; 
                and
                    (B) by striking ``(as so amended)''.
    (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall take effect as though included in the enactment of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-148).

SEC. 312. THIRD-PARTY ADMINISTRATORS.

    Any obligation on a third-party administrator under this Act 
(including the amendments made by this Act) shall not affect any other 
direct or indirect requirement under any other provision Federal law 
that applies to third-party administrators offering services to group 
health plans.

SEC. 313. GROUP HEALTH PLAN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

    Part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300gg-91 et seq.), as amended by section 303, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2797. GROUP HEALTH PLAN REPORTING.

    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or health insurance issuer 
offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall submit to 
the Secretary, not later than March 1 of each year, the following 
information with respect to the health plan in the previous plan year:
            ``(1) The beginning and end dates of the plan year.
            ``(2) The number of enrollees.
            ``(3) Each State in which the plan is offered.
            ``(4) The 50 brand prescription drugs most frequently 
        dispensed by pharmacies for claims paid by the issuer, and the 
        total number of paid claims for each such drug.
            ``(5) The 50 most costly prescription drugs with respect to 
        the plan by total annual spending, and the annual amount spent 
        by the plan for each such drug.
            ``(6) The 50 prescription drugs with the greatest increase 
        in plan expenditures over the plan year preceding the plan year 
        that is the subject of the report, and, for each such drug, the 
        change in amounts expended by the plan in each such plan year.
            ``(7) Total spending on health care services by such group 
        health plan, broken down by--
                    ``(A) the type of costs, including--
                            ``(i) hospital costs;
                            ``(ii) health care provider and clinical 
                        service costs;
                            ``(iii) costs for prescription drugs; and
                            ``(iv) other medical costs; and
                    ``(B) spending on prescription drugs by--
                            ``(i) the health plan; and
                            ``(ii) the enrollees.
            ``(8) The average monthly premium--
                    ``(A) paid by employers on behalf of enrollees; and
                    ``(B) paid by enrollees.
            ``(9) Any impact on premiums by rebates, fees, and any 
        other remuneration paid by drug manufacturers to the plan or 
        its administrators or service providers, with respect to 
        prescription drugs prescribed to enrollees in the plan, 
        including--
                    ``(A) the amounts so paid for each therapeutic 
                class of drugs; and
                    ``(B) the amounts so paid for each of the 25 drugs 
                that yielded the highest amount of rebates and other 
                remuneration under the plan from drug manufacturers 
                during the plan year.
            ``(10) Any reduction in premiums and out-of-pocket costs 
        associated with rebates, fees, or other remuneration described 
        in paragraph (9).
    ``(b) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date on which the 
first report is required under subsection (a) and biannually 
thereafter, the Secretary, acting through the Assistant Secretary of 
Planning and Evaluation and in coordination with the Inspector General 
of the Department of Health and Human Services, shall make available on 
the internet website of the Department of Health and Human Services a 
report on prescription drug reimbursements under group health plans, 
prescription drug pricing trends, and the role of prescription drug 
costs in contributing to premium increases or decreases under such 
plans, aggregated in such a way as no drug or plan specific information 
will be made public.
    ``(c) Privacy Protections.--No confidential or trade secret 
information submitted to the Secretary under subsection (a) shall be 
included in the report under subsection (b).''.

SEC. 314. STUDY BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF UNITED STATES.

    (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
(referred to in this section as the ``Comptroller General'') shall, in 
consultation with appropriate stakeholders, conduct a study on the role 
of pharmacy benefit managers.
    (b) Permissible Examination.--In conducting the study required 
under subsection (a), the Comptroller General may examine various 
qualitative and quantitative aspects of the role of pharmacy benefit 
managers, such as the following:
            (1) The role that pharmacy benefit managers play in the 
        pharmaceutical supply chain.
            (2) The state of competition among pharmacy benefit 
        managers, including the market share for the Nation's largest 
        pharmacy benefit managers.
            (3) The use of rebates and fees by pharmacy benefit 
        managers, including--
                    (A) the extent to which rebates are passed on to 
                health plans and whether such rebates are passed on to 
                individuals enrolled in such plans;
                    (B) the extent to which rebates are kept by such 
                pharmacy benefit managers; and
                    (C) the role of any fees charged by such pharmacy 
                benefit managers.
            (4) Whether pharmacy benefit managers structure their 
        formularies in favor of high-rebate prescription drugs over 
        lower-cost, lower-rebate alternatives.
            (5) The average prior authorization approval time for 
        pharmacy benefit managers.
            (6) Factors affecting the use of step therapy by pharmacy 
        benefit managers.
    (c) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, 
and Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
the House of Representatives a report containing the results of the 
study conducted under subsection (a), including policy recommendations.

                   TITLE IV--IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTH

SEC. 401. IMPROVING AWARENESS OF DISEASE PREVENTION.

    The Public Health Service Act is amended by striking section 313 of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 245) and inserting the following:

``SEC. 313. PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ON THE IMPORTANCE OF 
              VACCINATIONS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in coordination with 
other offices and agencies, as appropriate, shall award competitive 
grants to one or more public or private entities to carry out a 
national, evidence-based campaign to increase awareness and knowledge 
of the safety and effectiveness of vaccines for the prevention and 
control of diseases, combat misinformation about vaccines, and 
disseminate scientific and evidence-based vaccine-related information, 
with the goal of increasing rates of vaccination across all ages, as 
applicable, particularly in communities with low rates of vaccination, 
to reduce and eliminate vaccine-preventable diseases.
    ``(b) Consultation.--In carrying out the campaign under this 
section, the Secretary shall consult with appropriate public health and 
medical experts, including the National Academy of Medicine and medical 
and public health associations and nonprofit organizations, in the 
development, implementation, and evaluation of the evidence-based 
public awareness campaign.
    ``(c) Requirements.--The campaign under this section shall--
            ``(1) be a national, evidence-based initiative;
            ``(2) include the development of resources for communities 
        with low rates of vaccination, including culturally- and 
        linguistically-appropriate resources, as applicable;
            ``(3) include the dissemination of vaccine information and 
        communication resources to public health departments, health 
        care providers, and health care facilities, including such 
        providers and facilities that provide prenatal and pediatric 
        care;
            ``(4) be complementary to, and coordinated with, any other 
        Federal, State, local, or Tribal efforts, as appropriate; and
            ``(5) assess the effectiveness of communication strategies 
        to increase rates of vaccination.
    ``(d) Additional Activities.--The campaign under this section may--
            ``(1) include the use of television, radio, the internet, 
        and other media and telecommunications technologies;
            ``(2) be focused to address specific needs of communities 
        and populations with low rates of vaccination; and
            ``(3) include the dissemination of scientific and evidence-
        based vaccine-related information, such as--
                    ``(A) advancements in evidence-based research 
                related to diseases that may be prevented by vaccines 
                and vaccine development;
                    ``(B) information on vaccinations for individuals 
                and communities, including individuals for whom 
                vaccines are not recommended by the Advisory Committee 
                for Immunization Practices, and the effects of low 
                vaccination rates within a community on such 
                individuals;
                    ``(C) information on diseases that may be prevented 
                by vaccines; and
                    ``(D) information on vaccine safety and the systems 
                in place to monitor vaccine safety.
    ``(e) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall--
            ``(1) establish benchmarks and metrics to quantitatively 
        measure and evaluate the awareness campaign under this section;
            ``(2) conduct qualitative assessments regarding the 
        awareness campaign under this section; and
            ``(3) prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, 
        Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and Committee on 
        Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives an 
        evaluation of the awareness campaign under this section.
    ``(f) Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds appropriated under this 
section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, 
State, and local public funds provided for activities described in this 
section.
    ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section and section 317(k) such sums as 
may be necessary for fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.

SEC. 402. GRANTS TO ADDRESS VACCINE-PREVENTABLE DISEASES.

    (a) In General.--Section 317(k)(1) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 247b(k)(1)) is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``; and'' and 
        inserting a semicolon;
            (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period and 
        inserting a semicolon; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(E) planning, implementation, and evaluation of 
        activities to address vaccine-preventable diseases, including 
        activities to--
                    ``(i) identify communities at high risk of 
                outbreaks related to vaccine-preventable diseases, 
                including through improved data collection and 
                analysis;
                    ``(ii) pilot innovative approaches to improve 
                vaccination rates in communities and among populations 
                with low rates of vaccination;
                    ``(iii) reduce barriers to accessing vaccines and 
                evidence-based information about the health effects of 
                vaccines;
                    ``(iv) partner with community organizations and 
                health care providers to develop and deliver evidence-
                based interventions, including culturally- and 
                linguistically-appropriate interventions, to increase 
                vaccination rates;
                    ``(v) improve delivery of evidence-based vaccine-
                related information to parents and others; and
                    ``(vi) improve the ability of State, local, tribal, 
                and territorial public health departments to engage 
                communities at high risk for outbreaks related to 
                vaccine-preventable diseases; and
            ``(F) research related to strategies for improving 
        awareness of scientific and evidence-based vaccine-related 
        information, including for communities with low rates of 
        vaccination, in order to understand barriers to vaccination, 
        improve vaccination rates, and assess the public health 
        outcomes of such strategies.''.
    (b) Supplemental Grant Funds.--Section 330(d)(1) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254b) is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (2) in subparagraph (G), by striking the period and and 
        inserting ``; and''; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(H) improving access to recommended 
                immunizations.''.

SEC. 403. GUIDE ON EVIDENCE-BASED STRATEGIES FOR PUBLIC HEALTH 
              DEPARTMENT OBESITY PREVENTION PROGRAMS.

    (a) Development and Dissemination of an Evidence-based Strategies 
Guide.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this 
section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, not later than 2 years 
after the date of enactment of this Act, shall--
            (1) develop a guide on evidence-based strategies for State, 
        territorial, and local health departments to use to build and 
        maintain effective obesity prevention and reduction programs, 
        and, in consultation with Indian Tribes and Tribal 
        organizations, a guide on such evidence-based strategies with 
        respect to Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations for such 
        Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations to use for such purpose, 
        both of which guides shall--
                    (A) describe an integrated program structure for 
                implementing interventions proven to be effective in 
                preventing and reducing the incidence of obesity; and
                    (B) recommend--
                            (i) optimal resources, including staffing 
                        and infrastructure, for promoting nutrition and 
                        obesity prevention and reduction; and
                            (ii) strategies for effective obesity 
                        prevention programs for State, territorial, and 
                        local health departments, Indian Tribes, and 
                        Tribal organizations, including strategies 
                        related to--
                                    (I) the application of evidence-
                                based and evidence-informed practices 
                                to prevent and reduce obesity rates;
                                    (II) the development, 
                                implementation, and evaluation of 
                                obesity prevention and reduction 
                                strategies for specific communities and 
                                populations;
                                    (III) demonstrated knowledge of 
                                obesity prevention practices that 
                                reduce associated preventable diseases, 
                                health conditions, death, and health 
                                care costs;
                                    (IV) best practices for the 
                                coordination of efforts to prevent and 
                                reduce obesity and related chronic 
                                diseases;
                                    (V) addressing the underlying risk 
                                factors and social determinants of 
                                health that impact obesity rates; and
                                    (VI) interdisciplinary coordination 
                                between relevant public health 
                                officials specializing in fields such 
                                as nutrition, physical activity, 
                                epidemiology, communications, and 
                                policy implementation, and 
                                collaboration between public health 
                                officials, community-based 
                                organizations, and others, as 
                                appropriate; and
            (2) disseminate the guides and current research, evidence-
        based practices, tools, and educational materials related to 
        obesity prevention, consistent with the guide, to State, 
        territorial, and local health departments, Indian Tribes, and 
        Tribal organizations.
    (b) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
provide technical assistance to State, territorial, and local health 
departments, Indian Tribes, and Tribal organizations to support such 
health departments in implementing the guide developed under subsection 
(a)(1).
    (c) Indian Tribes; Tribal Organizations.--The terms ``Indian 
Tribe'' and ``Tribal organization'' have the meanings given the terms 
``Indian tribe'' and ``tribal organization'', respectively, in section 
4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 
U.S.C. 5304).

SEC. 404. EXPANDING CAPACITY FOR HEALTH OUTCOMES.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting 
after section 330M (42 U.S.C. 254c-19) the following:

``SEC. 330N. EXPANDING CAPACITY FOR HEALTH OUTCOMES.

    ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
            ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
        entity providing health care services in rural areas, frontier 
        areas, health professional shortage areas, or medically 
        underserved areas, or to medically underserved populations or 
        Native Americans, including Indian tribes or tribal 
        organizations.
            ``(2) Health professional shortage area.--The term `health 
        professional shortage area' means a health professional 
        shortage area designated under section 332.
            ``(3) Indian tribe.--The terms `Indian tribe' and `tribal 
        organization' have the meanings given such terms in section 4 
        of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
            ``(4) Medically underserved population.--The term 
        `medically underserved population' has the meaning given the 
        term in section 330(b)(3).
            ``(5) Native americans.--The term `Native Americans' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 736 and includes Indian 
        tribes and tribal organizations.
            ``(6) Technology-enabled collaborative learning and 
        capacity building model.--The term `technology-enabled 
        collaborative learning and capacity building model' means a 
        distance health education model that connects health care 
        professionals, and particularly specialists, with multiple 
        other health care professionals through simultaneous 
        interactive videoconferencing for the purpose of facilitating 
        case-based learning, disseminating best practices, and 
        evaluating outcomes.
    ``(b) Program Established.--The Secretary shall, as appropriate, 
award grants to evaluate, develop, and, as appropriate, expand the use 
of technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity building 
models, to increase access to health care services, such as those to 
address chronic diseases and conditions, mental health, substance use 
disorders, prenatal and maternal health, pediatric care, pain 
management, palliative care, and other specialty care in rural areas, 
frontier areas, health professional shortage areas, or medically 
underserved areas and for medically underserved populations or Native 
Americans, including Indian Tribes and Tribal organizations.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--
            ``(1) In general.--Grants awarded under subsection (b) 
        shall be used for--
                    ``(A) the development and acquisition of 
                instructional programming, and the training of health 
                care providers and other professionals that provide or 
                assist in the provision of services through such 
                models;
                    ``(B) information collection and evaluation 
                activities to study the impact of such models on 
                patient outcomes and health care providers, and to 
                identify best practices for the expansion and use of 
                such models; or
                    ``(C) other activities consistent with achieving 
                the objectives of the grants awarded under this 
                section, as determined by the Secretary.
            ``(2) Other uses.--In addition to any of the uses under 
        paragraph (1), grants awarded under subsection (b) may be used 
        for--
                    ``(A) equipment to support the use and expansion of 
                technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity 
                building models, including for hardware and software 
                that enables distance learning, health care provider 
                support, and the secure exchange of electronic health 
                information; or
                    ``(B) support for health care providers and other 
                professionals that provide or assist in the provision 
                of services through such models.
    ``(d) Length of Grants.--Grants awarded under subsection (b) shall 
be for a period of up to 5 years.
    ``(e) Application.--An eligible entity that seeks to receive a 
grant under subsection (b) shall submit to the Secretary an 
application, at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require. Such application criteria 
shall include an assessment of the effect of technology-enabled 
collaborative learning and capacity building models on patient outcomes 
and health care providers.
    ``(f) Access to Broadband.--In administering grants under this 
section, the Secretary may coordinate with other agencies to ensure 
that funding opportunities are available to support access to reliable, 
high-speed internet for grantees.
    ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide (either 
directly through the Department of Health and Human Services or by 
contract) technical assistance to eligible entities, including 
recipients of grants under subsection (b), on the development, use, and 
evaluation of technology-enabled collaborative learning and capacity 
building models in order to expand access to health care services 
provided by such entities, including for medically underserved areas 
and to medically underserved populations or Native Americans, including 
Indian tribes and Tribal organizations.
    ``(h) Research and Evaluation.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
stakeholders with appropriate expertise in such models, shall develop a 
strategic plan to research and evaluate the evidence for such models. 
The Secretary shall use such plan to inform the activities carried out 
under this section.
    ``(i) Report by Secretary.--Not later than 4 years after the date 
of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to 
the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives, and post on the Internet website of the Department of 
Health and Human Services, a report including, at minimum--
            ``(1) a description of any new and continuing grants 
        awarded to entities under subsection (b) and the specific 
        purpose and amounts of such grants;
            ``(2) an overview of--
                    ``(A) the evaluations conducted under subsections 
                (b) or (f); and
                    ``(B) technical assistance provided under 
                subsection (g); and
            ``(3) a description of any significant findings or 
        developments in patient outcomes and health care providers and 
        best practices for eligible entities expanding, using, or 
        evaluating technology-enabled collaborative learning and 
        capacity building models, including through the activities 
        described in subsection (g).
    ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.

SEC. 405. PUBLIC HEALTH DATA SYSTEM MODERNIZATION.

    Subtitle C of title XXVIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300hh-31 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 2822. PUBLIC HEALTH DATA SYSTEM MODERNIZATION GRANTS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall--
            ``(1) award grants to State, local, Tribal, and territorial 
        public health departments for the expansion and modernization 
        of public health data systems, to assist public health 
        departments in--
                    ``(A) assessing current data infrastructure 
                capabilities and gaps to improve and increase 
                consistency in data collection, storage, analysis, and, 
                as appropriate, to improve dissemination of public 
                health-related information;
                    ``(B) improving secure public health data 
                collection, transmission, exchange, maintenance, and 
                analysis;
                    ``(C) simplifying and supporting reporting by 
                health care providers, as applicable, pursuant to State 
                law, including through the use of health information 
                technology, to State, local, Tribal, and territorial 
                public health departments, including public health 
                officials in multiple jurisdictions within such State, 
                as appropriate;
                    ``(D) enhancing interoperability of public health 
                data systems (including systems created or accessed by 
                public health departments) with health information 
                technology, including health information technology 
                certified under section 3001(c)(5);
                    ``(E) supporting earlier disease and health 
                condition detection, such as through near real-time 
                data monitoring, to support rapid public health 
                responses; and
                    ``(F) supporting activities within the applicable 
                jurisdiction related to the expansion and modernization 
                of electronic case reporting;
            ``(2) as appropriate, conduct activities related to the 
        interoperability and improvement of applicable public health 
        data systems used by the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention, and, in coordination with the Office of the 
        National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, the 
        designation of data and technology standards for health 
        information systems of the public health infrastructure with 
        deference given to standards published by standards development 
        organizations and voluntary consensus-based standards bodies; 
        and
            ``(3) develop and utilize public-private partnerships for 
        technical assistance and related implementation support for 
        State, local, Tribal, and territorial public health 
        departments, and the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention, on the expansion and modernization of electronic 
        case reporting and public health data systems, as applicable.
    ``(b) Requirements.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may not award a grant 
        under subsection (a)(1) unless the applicant uses or agrees to 
        use standards recognized by the National Coordinator for Health 
        Information Technology pursuant to section 3001(c)(1) or 
        adopted by the Secretary under section 3004.
            ``(2) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirement 
        under paragraph (1) with respect to an applicant if the 
        Secretary determines that the activities under subsection (a) 
        cannot otherwise be carried out within the applicable 
        jurisdiction.
            ``(3) Application.--A State, local, Tribal, or territorial 
        health department applying for a grant under this section shall 
        submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such 
        manner as the Secretary may require. Such application shall 
        include information describing--
                    ``(A) the activities that will be supported by the 
                grant; and
                    ``(B) how the modernization of such public health 
                data systems will support or impact the public health 
                infrastructure of the health department, including a 
                description of remaining gaps, if any, and the actions 
                needed to address such gaps.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--An entity receiving a grant under this section 
may use amounts received under such grant for one or both of the 
following:
            ``(1) Carrying out activities described in subsection 
        (a)(1) to support public health data systems (including 
        electronic case reporting), which may include support for, and 
        training of, professionals with expertise in contributing to 
        and using such systems (including public health data 
        scientists).
            ``(2) Developing and disseminating information related to 
        the use and importance of public health data.
    ``(d) Strategy and Implementation Plan.--Not later than 180 days 
after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act, the 
Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, shall submit to the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, a coordinated 
strategy and an accompanying implementation plan that identifies and 
demonstrates the steps the Secretary will carry out to--
            ``(1) update and improve applicable public health data 
        systems used by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 
        and
            ``(2) carry out the activities described in this section to 
        support the improvement of State, local, Tribal, and 
        territorial public health data systems.
    ``(e) Consultation.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall consult with 
State, local, Tribal, and territorial health departments, professional 
medical and public health associations, associations representing 
hospitals or other health care entities, health information technology 
experts, and other appropriate entities regarding the plan and grant 
program to modernize public health data systems pursuant to this 
section. Such activities may include the provision of technical 
assistance related to the exchange of information by such public health 
data systems used by relevant health care and public health entities at 
the local, State, Federal, Tribal, and territorial levels.
    ``(f) Report to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit a report to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives 
that includes--
            ``(1) a description of any barriers to--
                    ``(A) public health authorities implementing 
                interoperable public health data systems and electronic 
                case reporting;
                    ``(B) the exchange of information pursuant to 
                electronic case reporting; or
                    ``(C) reporting by health care providers using such 
                public health data systems, as appropriate, and 
                pursuant to State law;
            ``(2) an assessment of the potential public health impact 
        of implementing electronic case reporting and interoperable 
        public health data systems; and
            ``(3) a description of the activities carried out pursuant 
        to this section.
    ``(g) Electronic Case Reporting.--In this section, the term 
`electronic case reporting' means the automated identification, 
generation, and bilateral exchange of reports of health events among 
electronic health record or health information technology systems and 
public health authorities.
    ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.

SEC. 406. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting 
after section 330N of such Act, as added by section 404, the following:

``SEC. 330O. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with experts 
representing a variety of clinical specialties, State, tribal, or local 
public health officials, researchers, epidemiologists, statisticians, 
and community organizations, shall establish or continue a program to 
award competitive grants to eligible entities for the purpose of--
            ``(1) identifying, developing, or disseminating best 
        practices to improve maternal health care quality and outcomes, 
        eliminate preventable maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity, and improve infant health outcomes, which may 
        include--
                    ``(A) information on evidence-based practices to 
                improve the quality and safety of maternal health care 
                in hospitals and other health care settings of a State 
                or health care system, including by addressing topics 
                commonly associated with health complications or risks 
                related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and 
                postpartum care;
                    ``(B) best practices for improving maternal health 
                care based on data findings and reviews conducted by a 
                State maternal mortality review committee that address 
                topics of relevance to common complications or health 
                risks related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, 
                and postpartum care; and
                    ``(C) information on addressing determinants of 
                health that impact maternal health outcomes for women 
                before, during, and after pregnancy;
            ``(2) collaborating with State maternal mortality review 
        committees to identify issues for the development and 
        implementation of evidence-based practices to improve maternal 
        health outcomes and reduce preventable maternal mortality and 
        severe maternal morbidity;
            ``(3) providing technical assistance and supporting the 
        implementation of best practices identified in paragraph (1) to 
        entities providing health care services to pregnant and 
        postpartum women; and
            ``(4) identifying, developing, and evaluating new models of 
        care that improve maternal and infant health outcomes, which 
        may include the integration of community-based services and 
        clinical care.
    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
        in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require; and
            ``(2) demonstrate in such application that the entity is 
        capable of carrying out data-driven maternal safety and quality 
        improvement initiatives in the areas of obstetrics and 
        gynecology or maternal health.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.

SEC. 407. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by striking 
section 763 (42 U.S.C. 294p) and inserting the following:

``SEC. 763. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
award grants to accredited schools of allopathic medicine, osteopathic 
medicine, and nursing, and other health professional training programs 
for the training of health care professionals to reduce and prevent 
discrimination (including training related to implicit biases) in the 
provision of health care services related to prenatal care, labor care, 
birthing, and postpartum care.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection 
(a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Reporting Requirement.--Each entity awarded a grant under 
this section shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report on the 
status of activities conducted using the grant, including a description 
of the impact of such training on patient outcomes, as applicable.
    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and disseminate 
best practices for the training of health care professionals to reduce 
and prevent discrimination (including training related to implicit 
biases) in the provision of health care services related to prenatal 
care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.

SEC. 408. STUDY ON TRAINING TO REDUCE AND PREVENT DISCRIMINATION.

    Not later than 2 years after date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this section as 
the ``Secretary'') shall, through a contract with an independent 
research organization, conduct a study and make recommendations for 
accredited schools of allopathic medicine, osteopathic medicine, and 
nursing, and other health professional training programs on best 
practices related to training to reduce and prevent discrimination, 
including training related to implicit biases, in the provision of 
health care services related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, 
and postpartum care.

SEC. 409. PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVES.

    Section 317K(a)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
247b-12(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(E)(i) The Secretary, acting through the Director 
                of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
                in coordination with other offices and agencies, as 
                appropriate, shall establish or continue a competitive 
                grant program for the establishment or support of 
                perinatal quality collaboratives to improve perinatal 
                care and perinatal health outcomes for pregnant and 
                postpartum women and their infants. A State, Indian 
                Tribe, or Tribal organization may use funds received 
                through such grant to--
                            ``(I) support the use of evidence-based or 
                        evidence-informed practices to improve outcomes 
                        for maternal and infant health;
                            ``(II) work with clinical teams; experts; 
                        State, local, and, as appropriate, tribal 
                        public health officials; and stakeholders, 
                        including patients and families, to identify, 
                        develop, or disseminate best practices to 
                        improve perinatal care and outcomes; and
                            ``(III) employ strategies that provide 
                        opportunities for health care professionals and 
                        clinical teams to collaborate across health 
                        care settings and disciplines, including 
                        primary care and mental health, as appropriate, 
                        to improve maternal and infant health outcomes, 
                        which may include the use of data to provide 
                        timely feedback across hospital and clinical 
                        teams to inform responses, and to provide 
                        support and training to hospital and clinical 
                        teams for quality improvement, as appropriate.
                    ``(ii) To be eligible for a grant under clause (i), 
                an entity shall submit to the Secretary an application 
                in such form and manner and containing such information 
                as the Secretary may require.''.

SEC. 410. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    (a) Grants.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended 
by inserting after section 330O of such Act, as added by section 406, 
the following:

``SEC. 330P. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants for the purpose 
of establishing or operating evidence-based or innovative, evidence-
informed programs to deliver integrated health care services to 
pregnant and postpartum women to optimize the health of women and their 
infants, including to reduce adverse maternal health outcomes, 
pregnancy-related deaths, and related health disparities (including 
such disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
populations), and, as appropriate, by addressing issues researched 
under subsection (b)(2) of section 317K.
    ``(b) Integrated Services for Pregnant and Postpartum Women.--
            ``(1) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
        subsection (a), a State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization 
        (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-
        Determination and Education Assistance Act) shall work with 
        relevant stakeholders that coordinate care (including 
        coordinating resources and referrals for health care and social 
        services) to develop and carry out the program, including--
                    ``(A) State, Tribal, and local agencies responsible 
                for Medicaid, public health, social services, mental 
                health, and substance use disorder treatment and 
                services;
                    ``(B) health care providers who serve pregnant and 
                postpartum women; and
                    ``(C) community-based health organizations and 
                health workers, including providers of home visiting 
                services and individuals representing communities with 
                disproportionately high rates of maternal mortality and 
                severe maternal morbidity, and including those 
                representing racial and ethnicity minority populations.
            ``(2) Terms.--
                    ``(A) Period.--A grant awarded under subsection (a) 
                shall be made for a period of 5 years. Any supplemental 
                award made to a grantee under subsection (a) may be 
                made for a period of less than 5 years.
                    ``(B) Preference.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
                            ``(i) give preference to States, Indian 
                        Tribes, and Tribal organizations that have the 
                        highest rates of maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity relative to other such 
                        States, Indian Tribes, or Tribal organizations, 
                        respectively; and
                            ``(ii) shall consider health disparities 
                        related to maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity, including such disparities 
                        associated with racial and ethnic minority 
                        populations.
                    ``(C) Priority.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to 
                applications from up to 15 entities described in 
                subparagraph (B)(i).
                    ``(D) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall require 
                grantees to evaluate the outcomes of the programs 
                supported under the grant.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.''.
    (b) Report on Grant Outcomes and Dissemination of Best Practices.--
            (1) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2026, the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Committee on 
        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
        Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives a report that describes--
                    (A) the outcomes of the activities supported by the 
                grants awarded under the amendments made by this 
                section on maternal and child health;
                    (B) best practices and models of care used by 
                recipients of grants under such amendments; and
                    (C) obstacles identified by recipients of grants 
                under such amendments, and strategies used by such 
                recipients to deliver care, improve maternal and child 
                health, and reduce health disparities.
            (2) Dissemination of best practices.--Not later than August 
        1, 2026, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
        disseminate information on best practices and models of care 
        used by recipients of grants under the amendments made by this 
        section (including best practices and models of care relating 
        to the reduction of health disparities, including such 
        disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
        populations, in rates of maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity) to relevant stakeholders, which may include health 
        providers, medical schools, nursing schools, relevant State, 
        tribal, and local agencies, and the general public.

SEC. 411. EXTENSION FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS, THE NATIONAL HEALTH 
              SERVICE CORPS, AND TEACHING HEALTH CENTERS THAT OPERATE 
              GME PROGRAMS.

    (a) Community Health Centers.--Section 10503(b)(1)(F) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-2(b)(1)(F)) 
is amended by striking ``fiscal year 2019'' and inserting ``each of 
fiscal years 2019 through 2024''.
    (b) National Health Service Corps.--Section 10503(b)(2)(F) of the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 254b-2(b)(2)(F)) 
is amended by striking ``and 2019'' and inserting ``through 2024''.
    (c) Teaching Health Centers That Operate Graduate Medical Education 
Programs.--Section 340H(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 256h(g)(1)) is amended by striking ``and 2019'' and inserting 
``through 2024''.
    (d) Application of Provisions.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to 
this section for each of fiscal years 2019 through 2024 shall be 
subject to the requirements contained in Public Law 115-245 for funds 
for programs authorized under sections 330 through 340 of the Public 
Health Service Act.
    (e) Conforming Amendments.--Paragraph (4) of section 3014(h) of 
title 18, United States Code, as amended by section 50901 of Public Law 
115-123, is amended by striking ``and section 50901(e) of the Advancing 
Chronic Care, Extenders, and Social Services Act'' and inserting ``, 
section 50901(e) of the Advancing Chronic Care, Extenders, and Social 
Services Act, and section 411(d) of the Lower Health Care Costs Act''.

SEC. 412. OTHER PROGRAMS.

    (a) Type I.--Section 330B(b)(2)(D) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 254c-2(b)(2)(D)) is amended by striking ``and 2019'' and 
inserting ``through 2024''.
    (b) Indians.--Subparagraph (D) of section 330C(c)(2) of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c-3(c)(2)(D)) is amended by striking 
``and 2019'' and inserting ``through 2024''.

SEC. 413. NATIVE AMERICAN SUICIDE PREVENTION.

    Section 520E(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290bb-
36(b) is amended by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
            ``(4) Consultation.--A State applying for a grant or 
        cooperative agreement under this section shall, in the 
        development and implementation of a statewide early 
        intervention strategy, consult or confer with entities 
        described in paragraph (1)(C) in such State.''.

SEC. 414. MINIMUM AGE OF SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 906(d) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 387f(d)) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (3)(A)(ii), by striking ``18 years'' and 
        inserting ``21 years''; and
            (2) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(5) Minimum age of sale.--It shall be unlawful for any 
        retailer to sell a tobacco product to any person younger than 
        21 years of age.''.
    (b) Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall publish in the 
Federal Register a final rule to update the regulations issued under 
chapter IX of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 387 
et seq.) as appropriate, only to carry out the amendments made by 
subsection (a), including updating the relevant age verification 
requirements under part 1140 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations 
to require age verification for individuals under the age of 30. Such 
final rule shall--
            (1) take full effect not later than 90 days after the date 
        on which such final rule is published; and
            (2) be deemed to be in compliance with all applicable 
        provisions of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code and all 
        other provisions of law relating to rulemaking procedures.
    (c) Notification.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide written notification 
to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives regarding the progress of the Department of Health and 
Human Services towards promulgating the final rule under subsection 
(b). If, 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, such rule 
has not been promulgated in accordance with subsection (b), the 
Secretary shall provide a written notification and a justification for 
the delay in rulemaking to such committees.
    (d) Penalties for Violations.--
            (1) In general.--Section 103(q)(2) of the Family Smoking 
        Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (Public Law 111-31) is 
        amended--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding 
                clause (i), by inserting ``section 906(d)(5) or of'' 
                after ``violations of''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``section 
                906(d)(5) or of'' after ``a retailer of''.
            (2) Repeated violations.--Section 303(f)(8) of the Federal 
        Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 333(f)(8)) is amended 
        by inserting ``section 906(d)(5) or of'' after ``repeated 
        violations of''.
            (3) Misbranded products.--Section 903(a)(7)(B) of the 
        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 387c) is 
        amended by inserting ``section 906(d)(5) or of'' after 
        ``violation of''.

SEC. 415. SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.

    (a) In General.--Section 1926 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300x-26) is amended--
            (1) in the heading--
                    (A) by striking ``state law regarding''; and
                    (B) by striking ``18'' and inserting ``21'';
            (2) by striking subsections (a) and (d);
            (3) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections 
        (a) and (b), respectively;
            (4) by amending subsection (a), as so redesignated, to read 
        as follows:
    ``(a) In General.--A funding agreement for a grant under section 
1921 is that the State involved will--
            ``(1) annually conduct random, unannounced inspections to 
        ensure that retailers do not sell tobacco products to 
        individuals under the age of 21; and
            ``(2) annually submit to the Secretary a report 
        describing--
                    ``(A) the activities carried out by the State to 
                ensure that retailers do not sell tobacco products to 
                individuals under the age of 21;
                    ``(B) the extent of success the State has achieved 
                in ensuring that retailers do not sell tobacco products 
                to individuals under the age of 21; and
                    ``(C) the strategies to be utilized by the State to 
                ensure that retailers do not sell tobacco products to 
                individuals under the age of 21 during the fiscal year 
                for which the grant is sought.'';
            (5) in subsection (b), as so redesignated--
                    (A) by striking paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4);
                    (B) by striking ``Before making'' and inserting the 
                following:
            ``(1) In general.--Before making'';
                    (C) by striking ``for the first applicable fiscal 
                year or any subsequent fiscal year'';
                    (D) by striking ``subsections (a) and (b)'' and 
                inserting ``subsection (a)'';
                    (E) by striking ``equal to--'' and inserting ``up 
                to 10 percent of the amount determined under section 
                1933 for the State for the applicable fiscal year.''; 
                and
                    (F) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(2) Limitation.--
                    ``(A) In general.--A State shall not have funds 
                withheld pursuant to paragraph (1) if such State for 
                which the Secretary has made a determination of 
                noncompliance under such paragraph--
                            ``(i) certifies to the Secretary by May 1 
                        of the fiscal year for which the funds are 
                        appropriated, consistent with subparagraph (B), 
                        that the State will commit additional State 
                        funds, in accordance with paragraph (1), to 
                        ensure that retailers do not sell tobacco 
                        products to individuals under 21 years of age;
                            ``(ii) agrees to comply with a negotiated 
                        agreement for a corrective action plan that is 
                        approved by the Secretary and carried out in 
                        accordance with guidelines issued by the 
                        Secretary; or
                            ``(iii) is a territory that receives less 
                        than $1,000,000 for a fiscal year under section 
                        1921.
                    ``(B) Certification.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The amount of funds to 
                        be committed by a State pursuant to 
                        subparagraph (A)(i) shall be equal to 1 percent 
                        of such State's substance abuse allocation 
                        determined under section 1933 for each 
                        percentage point by which the State misses the 
                        retailer compliance rate goal established by 
                        the Secretary.
                            ``(ii) State expenditures.--For a fiscal 
                        year in which a State commits funds as 
                        described in clause (i), such State shall 
                        maintain State expenditures for tobacco 
                        prevention programs and for compliance 
                        activities at a level that is not less than the 
                        level of such expenditures maintained by the 
                        State for the preceding fiscal year, plus the 
                        additional funds for tobacco compliance 
                        activities required under clause (i). The State 
                        shall submit a report to the Secretary on all 
                        State obligations of funds for such fiscal year 
                        and all State expenditures for the preceding 
                        fiscal year for tobacco prevention and 
                        compliance activities by program activity by 
                        July 31 of such fiscal year.
                            ``(iii) Discretion.--The Secretary shall 
                        exercise discretion in enforcing the timing of 
                        the State obligation of the additional funds 
                        required by the certification described in 
                        subparagraph (A)(i) as late as July 31 of such 
                        fiscal year.
                    ``(C) Failure to certify.--If a State described in 
                subparagraph (A) fails to certify to the Secretary 
                pursuant to subparagraph (A)(i) or enter into, or 
                comply with, a negotiated agreement under subparagraph 
                (A)(ii), the Secretary may take action pursuant to 
                paragraph (1).''; and
            (6) by adding at the end the following:
    ``(c) Implementation of Reporting Requirements.--
            ``(1) Transition period.--The Secretary shall--
                    ``(A) not withhold amounts under subsection (b) for 
                the 3-year period immediately following the date of 
                enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act; and
                    ``(B) use discretion in exercising its authority 
                under subsection (b) during the 2-year period 
                immediately following the 3-year period described in 
                subparagraph (A), to allow for a transition period for 
                implementation of the reporting requirements under 
                subsection (a)(2).
            ``(2) Regulations or guidance.--Not later than 180 days 
        after the date of enactment of the Lower Health Care Costs Act 
        the Secretary shall update regulations under part 96 of title 
        45, Code of Federal Regulations or guidance on the retailer 
        compliance rate goal under subsection (b), the use of funds 
        provided under section 1921 for purposes of meeting the 
        requirements of this section, and reporting requirements under 
        subsection (a)(2).
            ``(3) Coordination.--The Secretary shall ensure the 
        Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use 
        coordinates, as appropriate, with the Commissioner of Food and 
        Drugs in providing technical assistance under this section to 
        States, related to ensuring retailers do not sell tobacco 
        products to individuals under the age of 21, that is consistent 
        with applicable regulations issued by the Food and Drug 
        Administration.
    ``(d) Transitional Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants under 
        this subsection to each State that receives funding under 
        section 1921 to ensure compliance of each such State with this 
        section.
            ``(2) Use of funds.--A State receiving a grant under this 
        subsection--
                    ``(A) shall use amounts received under such grant 
                for activities to plan for or ensure compliance in the 
                State with subsection (a); and
                    ``(B) in the case of a State for which the 
                Secretary has made a determination under subsection (b) 
                that the State is prepared to meet, or has met, the 
                requirements of subsection (a), may use such funds for 
                tobacco cessation activities, strategies to prevent the 
                use of tobacco products by individuals under the age of 
                21, or allowable uses under section 1921.
            ``(3) Supplement not supplant.--Grants under this 
        subsection shall be used to supplement and not supplant other 
        Federal, State, and local public funds provided for activities 
        under paragraph (2).
            ``(4) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
        subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated $18,580,790 
        for each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024.
            ``(5) Sunset.--This subsection shall have no force or 
        effect after September 30, 2024.
    ``(e) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to States related to the activities required under this 
section.''.
    (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report on the 
status of implementing the requirements of section 1926 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x-26), as amended by subsection (a), 
and a description of any technical assistance provided under subsection 
(e) of such section, including the number of meetings requested and 
held related to technical assistance.
    (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 212 of division D of the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2010 (Public Law 111-117) is repealed.

         TITLE V--IMPROVING THE EXCHANGE OF HEALTH INFORMATION

SEC. 501. REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE HEALTH CLAIMS, NETWORK, AND COST 
              INFORMATION.

    (a) In General.--Part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 
2715A the following:

``SEC. 2715B. REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE HEALTH CLAIMS, NETWORK, AND COST 
              INFORMATION.

    ``(a) In General.--A group health plan or a health insurance issuer 
offering group or individual health insurance coverage shall make 
available for access, exchange, and use without special effort, through 
application programming interfaces (or successor technology or 
standards), the information described in subsection (b), in the manner 
described in subsection (b) and otherwise consistent with this section.
    ``(b) Information.--The following information is required to be 
made available, as the Secretary may specify:
            ``(1) Historical claims, provider encounter, and payment 
        data for each enrollee, which shall--
                    ``(A) include adjudicated medical and prescription 
                drug claims and equivalent encounters, including all 
                data elements contained in such transactions--
                            ``(i) that were adjudicated by the group 
                        health plan or health insurance issuer during 
                        the previous 5 years or the enrollee's entire 
                        period of enrollment in the applicable plan or 
                        coverage if such period is less than the 
                        previous 5 years;
                            ``(ii) that involve benefits managed by any 
                        third party, such as a pharmacy benefits 
                        manager or radiology benefits manager that 
                        manages benefits or adjudicates claims on 
                        behalf of the plan or coverage; and
                            ``(iii) from any other health plan or 
                        health insurance coverage offered by the same 
                        insurance issuer, in which the same enrollee 
                        was enrolled during the previous 5 years; and
                    ``(B) be available to an enrollee or former 
                enrollee, the enrollee's providers, and any third-party 
                applications or services authorized by the enrollee--
                            ``(i) through the application programming 
                        interfaces (or successor technology or 
                        standards) as required by this paragraph, in a 
                        single, longitudinal format that is easy to 
                        understand, secure, and that may update 
                        automatically;
                            ``(ii) as soon as practicable, and in no 
                        case later than the period of time determined 
                        by the Secretary, after the claim is 
                        adjudicated or the data is received by the 
                        health plan or health insurance issuer; and
                            ``(iii) to the enrollee, former enrollee, 
                        and any providers or third-party applications 
                        or services authorized by the enrollee, for 5 
                        years after the end date of the enrollee's 
                        enrollment in the plan or in any coverage 
                        offered by the health insurance issuer.
            ``(2) Identifying directory information for all in-network 
        providers, including facilities and practitioners, that 
        participate in the plan or coverage, which shall--
                    ``(A) include--
                            ``(i) the national provider identifier for 
                        in-network facilities and practitioners; and
                            ``(ii) the name, address, phone number, and 
                        specialty for each such facility and 
                        practitioner, based on the most recent 
                        interaction between the plan or coverage and 
                        that facility or practitioner;
                    ``(B) be capable of returning the information 
                necessary to establish a list of participating in-
                network facilities and practitioners, in a given 
                specialty or at a particular facility type, within a 
                specified geographic radius; and
                    ``(C) be capable of returning the network status, 
                when presented with identifiers for a given enrollee 
                and facility or practitioner.
            ``(3) Estimated enrollee out-of-pocket costs, including 
        costs expected to be incurred through a deductible, co-payment, 
        coinsurance, or other form of cost-sharing, for--
                    ``(A) a designated set of common services or 
                episodes of care, to be established by the Secretary 
                through rulemaking, including, at a minimum--
                            ``(i) in the case of services provided by a 
                        hospital, the 100 most common diagnosis-related 
                        groups, as used in the Medicare Inpatient 
                        Prospective Patient System (or successor 
                        episode-based reimbursement methodology) at 
                        that hospital, based on claims data adjudicated 
                        by the group health plan or health insurance 
                        issuer;
                            ``(ii) in the case of services provided in 
                        an out-patient setting, including radiology, 
                        lab tests, and out-patient surgical procedures, 
                        any service rendered by the facility or 
                        practitioner, and reimbursed by the health plan 
                        or health insurance issuer; and
                            ``(iii) in the case of post-acute care, 
                        including home health providers, skilled 
                        nursing facilities, inpatient rehabilitation 
                        facilities, and long-term care hospitals, the 
                        patient out-of-pocket costs for an episode of 
                        care, as the Secretary may determine, which 
                        permits users to reasonably compare costs 
                        across different facility and service types; 
                        and
                    ``(B) all prescription drugs currently included on 
                any tier of the formulary of the plan or coverage.
            ``(4) A list of the categories of providers of ancillary 
        services, as defined in section 2719(A)(i)(3), for which the 
        plan or coverage has no in-network providers.
    ``(c) Availability and Access.--Subject to all applicable Federal 
and State privacy, security, and breach notification laws, the 
application programming interfaces, including all data required to be 
made available through such interfaces, shall--
            ``(1) be made available by the applicable group health plan 
        or health insurance issuer, at no charge, to--
                    ``(A) enrollees and prospective enrollees in the 
                group health plan or health insurance coverage;
                    ``(B) third parties authorized by the enrollee;
                    ``(C) facilities and practitioners who are under 
                contract with the plan or coverage; and
                    ``(D) business associates of such facilities and 
                practitioners, as defined in section 160.103 of title 
                45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
                regulations);
            ``(2) be available to enrollees in the group health plan or 
        health insurance coverage, and to third-party applications or 
        services facilitating such access by enrollees, during the 
        enrollment process and for a minimum of 5 years after the end 
        date of the enrollee's enrollment in the plan or in any 
        coverage offered by the health insurance issuer;
            ``(3) permit persistent access by third party applications 
        or services authorized by the enrollee, for a reasonable period 
        of time, consistent with the requirements of the HIPAA Security 
        rule (part 160 of title 45 Code of Federal Regulations and 
        subparts A and C of part 164 of such title);
            ``(4) employ the applicable content, vocabulary, and 
        technical standards, as determined by the Secretary pursuant to 
        title XXX; and
            ``(5) employ security and authentication standards, as the 
        Secretary determines appropriate.
    ``(d) Rule of Construction Regarding Privacy.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to alter existing obligations of a covered 
entity or business associate under the privacy, security, and breach 
notification rules promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act or section 13402 of the 
HITECH Act, or to alter the Secretary's existing authority to modify 
such rules, under part 2 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
successor regulations), under section 444 of the General Education 
Provisions Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g) (commonly referred to as the `Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974'), under the amendments made 
by the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, or under State 
privacy law.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--Section 2715B of the Public Health Service 
Act, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect 18 months after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 502. RECOGNITION OF SECURITY PRACTICES.

    Part 1 of subtitle D of the Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 13412. RECOGNITION OF SECURITY PRACTICES.

    ``(a) In General.--Consistent with the authority of the Secretary 
under sections 1176 and 1177 of the Social Security Act, when making 
determinations relating to fines under section 13410, decreasing the 
length and extent of an audit under section 13411, or remedies 
otherwise agreed to by the Secretary, the Secretary shall consider 
whether the covered entity or business associate has adequately 
demonstrated that it had, for not less than the previous 12 months, 
recognized security practices in place that may--
            ``(1) mitigate fines under section 13410;
            ``(2) result in the early, favorable termination of an 
        audit under section 13411; and
            ``(3) mitigate the remedies that would otherwise be agreed 
        to in any agreement with respect to resolving potential 
        violations of the HIPAA Security rule (part 160 of title 45 
        Code of Federal Regulations and subparts A and C of part 164 of 
        such title) between the covered entity or business associate 
        and the Department of Health and Human Services.
    ``(b) Definition and Miscellaneous Provisions.--
            ``(1) Recognized security practices.--The term `recognized 
        security practices' means the standards, guidelines, best 
        practices, methodologies, procedures, and processes developed 
        under section 2(c)(15) of the National Institute of Standards 
        and Technology Act, the approaches promulgated under section 
        405(d) of the Cybersecurity Act of 2015, and other programs and 
        processes that address cybersecurity and that are developed, 
        recognized, or promulgated through regulations under other 
        statutory authorities. Such practices shall be determined by 
        the covered entity or business associate.
            ``(2) Limitation.--Nothing in this section shall be 
        construed as providing the Secretary authority to increase 
        fines under section 13410, or the length, extent or quantity of 
        audits under section 13411, due to a lack of compliance with 
        the recognized security practices.
            ``(3) No liability for nonparticipation.--Subject to 
        paragraph (4), nothing in this section shall be construed to 
        subject a covered entity or business associate to liability for 
        electing not to engage in the recognized security practices 
        defined by this section.
            ``(4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall 
        be construed to limit the Secretary's authority to enforce the 
        HIPAA Security rule (part 160 of title 45 Code of Federal 
        Regulations and subparts A and C of part 164 of such title), or 
        to supersede or conflict with an entity or business associate's 
        obligations under the HIPAA Security rule.''.

SEC. 503. GAO STUDY ON THE PRIVACY AND SECURITY RISKS OF ELECTRONIC 
              TRANSMISSION OF INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE HEALTH 
              INFORMATION TO AND FROM ENTITIES NOT COVERED BY THE 
              HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT.

    (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct 
a study to--
            (1) describe the roles of Federal agencies and the private 
        sector with respect to protecting the privacy and security of 
        individually identifiable health information transmitted 
        electronically to and from entities not covered by the 
        regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 
        1320d-2 note);
            (2) identify recent developments regarding the use of 
        application programming interfaces to access individually 
        identifiable health information, and implications for the 
        privacy and security of such information;
            (3) identify practices in the private sector, such as terms 
        and conditions for use, relating to the privacy, disclosure, 
        and secondary uses of individually identifiable health 
        information transmitted electronically to or from entities, 
        selected by an individual, that are not subject to the 
        regulations promulgated under section 264(c) of the Health 
        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996; and
            (4) identify steps the public and private sectors can take 
        to improve the private and secure access to and availability of 
        individually identifiable health information.
    (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
Congress a report concerning the findings of the study conducted under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 504. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS.

    (a) In General.--Section 3022(b) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300jj-52(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
            ``(4) Application of authorities under inspector general 
        act of 1978.--In carrying out this subsection, the Inspector 
        General shall have the same authorities as provided under 
        section 6 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
        App.).''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect as if included in the enactment of the 21st Century Cures 
Act (Public Law 114-255).

SEC. 505. PUBLIC MEETING.

    (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
convene a public meeting for purposes of discussing and providing input 
on patient-matching metrics for the purpose of enabling 
interoperability and the exchange of health information across health 
care organizations.
    (b) Experts.--The public meeting under this section may include--
            (1) representatives of relevant Federal agencies (including 
        representatives from the Office of the National Coordinator for 
        Health Information Technology);
            (2) State, local, Tribal, and territorial public health 
        officials;
            (3) stakeholders with expertise in health information 
        exchange;
            (4) stakeholders with expertise in capabilities relevant to 
        patient matching, such as experts in informatics and data 
        analytics;
            (5) stakeholders affected by record-matching (including 
        patients, hospitals, health systems, payers, health information 
        exchanges, and prescription drug monitoring programs); and
            (6) other representatives, as the Secretary determines 
        appropriate.
    (c) Topics.--Such public meeting shall include a discussion of--
            (1) standards and processes for assessing the accuracy of 
        patient-matching algorithms;
            (2) performance metrics for health care providers 
        purchasing patient-matching technology and algorithm 
        developers;
            (3) the development of benchmarks for the accuracy of 
        patient-matching algorithms;
            (4) considerations for State, local, Tribal, and 
        territorial capabilities and infrastructure related to data 
        exchange, interoperability, and matching patient records;
            (5) opportunities for the incorporation of innovative 
        technologies to improve patient matching; and
            (6) privacy and security protections.
                                                       Calendar No. 133

116th CONGRESS

  1st Session

                                S. 1895

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL

                      To lower health care costs.

_______________________________________________________________________

                              July 8, 2019

                       Reported with an amendment
[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 8094 Introduced in House (IH)]

<DOC>






116th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                H. R. 8094

     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                            August 22, 2020

  Mr. Rose of New York (for himself, Mr. McKinley, Mr. Brindisi, Mr. 
 Riggleman, Mr. Cisneros, Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Upton) introduced the 
   following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and 
                                Commerce

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider 
Protection Act''.

SEC. 2. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE 
              PROFESSIONALS.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE 
              PROFESSIONALS.

    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
award grants to health professions schools, academic health centers, 
State or local governments, or other appropriate public or private 
nonprofit entities for funding and participation in health professions 
and nursing training activities for the training of health care 
students, residents, or professionals in evidence-informed strategies 
to reduce and prevent suicide, burnout, behavioral health conditions, 
including mental health conditions and substance use disorders, among 
health care professionals, and in evidence-informed strategies to 
improve health care professionals' well-being and job satisfaction.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection 
(a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Reporting Requirement.--Each entity awarded a grant under 
this section shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report 
evaluating the activities supported by the grant.
    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and disseminate 
evidence-informed best practices for reducing and preventing suicide 
and burnout among health care professionals, and training health care 
professionals in appropriate strategies and promoting their mental and 
behavioral health and job satisfaction. Such best practices shall 
include specific recommendations for reducing and preventing suicide, 
burnout, and other mental and behavioral health concerns among health 
care professionals during or in the aftermath of a pandemic, natural 
disaster, or other crisis.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2021 through 2025.''.

SEC. 3. EDUCATION AND AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ENCOURAGING USE OF MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES BY HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and in 
consultation with the medical professional community, shall establish a 
national evidence-based education and awareness campaign targeting 
health care professionals to encourage such professionals to seek 
support and treatment for their own mental and behavioral health 
concerns, help such professionals identify risk factors in themselves 
and others and learn how best to respond to such risks, with the goal 
of reducing or preventing suicide, burnout, and mental and behavioral 
health conditions, and to address stigma associated with seeking mental 
and behavioral health support and treatment.
    (b) Reporting.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall provide an update on the campaign's 
progress, including a plan for evaluation that includes quantitative 
and qualitative metrics, and a media and dissemination plan, to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2021 through 2025.

SEC. 4. GRANTS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO PROMOTE MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AMONG THEIR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
              WORKFORCE.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.), as amended by section 2, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764A. GRANTS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO PROMOTE MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AMONG THEIR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
              WORKFORCE.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to health care 
providers, including medical professional associations, to establish or 
expand evidence-informed programs dedicated to promoting mental and 
behavioral health among their employees (including contractors) or 
members who are working on the front lines of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
    ``(b) Use of Grant Funds.--A health care provider awarded a grant 
under subsection (a) shall use amounts under the grant to implement a 
new program or protocol or expand an existing program or protocol to 
promote mental and behavioral health among employees (including 
contractors) or members who have previously treated or otherwise 
served, or are currently treating or otherwise serving, patients 
diagnosed with COVID-19, which may include any of the following:
            ``(1) Educating employees, including contractors, or 
        membership about risk factors for and signs of self-harm and 
        suicide and mental and behavioral health conditions in 
        accordance with evidence-based practices and standards.
            ``(2) Establishing new or enhancing existing evidence-based 
        programs or protocols for preventing mental and behavioral 
        health conditions, suicide, or self-harm.
            ``(3) Establishing new or enhancing existing peer-support 
        programs among employees (including contractors) or members.
            ``(4) Mental and behavioral health treatment, follow up 
        services and care, or referral for such services identified as 
        appropriate as a result of the screenings or prevention 
        programs and protocol described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
    ``(c) Grant Terms.--A grant awarded under subsection (a)--
            ``(1) shall be for a period of 3 years; and
            ``(2) may be renewed subject to the requirements of this 
        section.
    ``(d) Application Submission.--A health care provider seeking a 
grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as 
the Secretary may require.
    ``(e) Priority.--Priority shall be given to applications from 
health care providers located in current or former COVID-19 hotspots, 
as determined by the Secretary or health care providers which have 
diagnosed or treated a higher share of COVID-19 patients, as determined 
by the Secretary.
    ``(f) Reporting.--A health care provider awarded a grant under 
subsection (a) shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report 
evaluating the activities supported by the grant.
    ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for the period of 
fiscal years 2021 through 2023.''.

SEC. 5. COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND BURNOUT.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.), as amended by section 4, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764B. COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND BURNOUT.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
stakeholders, shall conduct a review and submit recommendations to 
Congress on policies to improve health care professional mental health 
and prevent burnout.
    ``(b) Considerations.--The study under subsection (a) shall focus 
on identifying--
            ``(1) the factors that contribute to mental and behavioral 
        health conditions and burnout among health care professionals;
            ``(2) the barriers to seeking and accessing mental and 
        behavioral health treatment for health care professionals, 
        including stigma and concerns about licensing and 
        credentialing;
            ``(3) the implications of poor mental and behavioral health 
        and burnout among health care professionals for the health care 
        system, the health care workforce, and patient outcomes;
            ``(4) the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on the mental 
        and behavioral health of health care professionals and related 
        preparedness strategies for future health emergencies;
            ``(5) the factors that promote mental and behavioral health 
        and resiliency among health care professionals, including 
        programs or protocols that strengthen mental and behavioral 
        health or prevent burnout among health care professionals; and
            ``(6) the efficacy of health professional training programs 
        that promote resiliency and improve mental health.
    ``(c) Recommendations.--The study required under subsection (a) 
shall include recommendations related to--
            ``(1) improving mental and behavioral health and preventing 
        burnout among health care professionals;
            ``(2) removing barriers to mental and behavioral health 
        care for health care professionals; and
            ``(3) strategies to promote resiliency among health care 
        professionals and other employees and contractors in health 
        care settings.
    ``(d) Completion.--The Secretary shall ensure that the study under 
subsection (a) is completed and submitted to Congress and made publicly 
available not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this 
section.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $3,000,000 for the period of 
fiscal years 2021 through 2023.''.

[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4349 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






116th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 4349

     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                             July 29, 2020

     Mr. Kaine (for himself, Mr. Young, Mr. Reed, and Mr. Cassidy) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
          Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
     To address behavioral health and well-being among health care 
                             professionals.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Dr. Lorna Breen Health Care Provider 
Protection Act''.

SEC. 2. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE 
              PROFESSIONALS.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764. BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE 
              PROFESSIONALS.

    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
award grants to health professions schools, academic health centers, 
State or local governments, or other appropriate public or private 
nonprofit entities for funding and participation in health professions 
and nursing training activities for the training of health care 
students, residents, or professionals in evidence-informed strategies 
to reduce and prevent suicide, burnout, behavioral health conditions, 
including mental health conditions and substance use disorders, among 
health care professionals, and in evidence-informed strategies to 
improve health care professionals' well-being and job satisfaction.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection 
(a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Reporting Requirement.--Each entity awarded a grant under 
this section shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report 
evaluating the activities supported by the grant.
    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and disseminate 
evidence-informed best practices for reducing and preventing suicide 
and burnout among health care professionals, and training health care 
professionals in appropriate strategies and promoting their mental and 
behavioral health and job satisfaction. Such best practices shall 
include specific recommendations for reducing and preventing suicide, 
burnout, and other mental and behavioral health concerns among health 
care professionals during or in the aftermath of a pandemic, natural 
disaster, or other crisis.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of fiscal years 2021 through 2025.''.

SEC. 3. EDUCATION AND AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ENCOURAGING USE OF MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES BY HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and in 
consultation with the medical professional community, shall establish a 
national evidence-based education and awareness campaign targeting 
health care professionals to encourage such professionals to seek 
support and treatment for their own mental and behavioral health 
concerns, help such professionals identify risk factors in themselves 
and others and learn how best to respond to such risks, with the goal 
of reducing or preventing suicide, burnout, and mental and behavioral 
health conditions, and to address stigma associated with seeking mental 
and behavioral health support and treatment.
    (b) Reporting.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall provide an update on the campaign's 
progress, including a plan for evaluation that includes quantitative 
and qualitative metrics, and a media and dissemination plan, to the 
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2021 through 2025.

SEC. 4. GRANTS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO PROMOTE MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AMONG THEIR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
              WORKFORCE.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.), as amended by section 2, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764A. GRANTS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO PROMOTE MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AMONG THEIR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
              WORKFORCE.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to health care 
providers, including medical professional associations, to establish or 
expand evidence-informed programs dedicated to promoting mental and 
behavioral health among their employees (including contractors) or 
members who are working on the front lines of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
    ``(b) Use of Grant Funds.--A health care provider awarded a grant 
under subsection (a) shall use amounts under the grant to implement a 
new program or protocol or expand an existing program or protocol to 
promote mental and behavioral health among employees (including 
contractors) or members who have previously treated or otherwise 
served, or are currently treating or otherwise serving, patients 
diagnosed with COVID-19, which may include any of the following:
            ``(1) Educating employees, including contractors, or 
        membership about risk factors for and signs of self-harm and 
        suicide and mental and behavioral health conditions in 
        accordance with evidence-based practices and standards.
            ``(2) Establishing new or enhancing existing evidence-based 
        programs or protocols for preventing mental and behavioral 
        health conditions, suicide, or self-harm.
            ``(3) Establishing new or enhancing existing peer-support 
        programs among employees (including contractors) or members.
            ``(4) Mental and behavioral health treatment, follow up 
        services and care, or referral for such services identified as 
        appropriate as a result of the screenings or prevention 
        programs and protocol described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
    ``(c) Grant Terms.--A grant awarded under subsection (a)--
            ``(1) shall be for a period of 3 years; and
            ``(2) may be renewed subject to the requirements of this 
        section.
    ``(d) Application Submission.--A health care provider seeking a 
grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as 
the Secretary may require.
    ``(e) Priority.--Priority shall be given to applications from 
health care providers located in current or former COVID-19 hotspots, 
as determined by the Secretary or health care providers which have 
diagnosed or treated a higher share of COVID-19 patients, as determined 
by the Secretary.
    ``(f) Reporting.--A health care provider awarded a grant under 
subsection (a) shall periodically submit to the Secretary a report 
evaluating the activities supported by the grant.
    ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for the period of 
fiscal years 2021 through 2023.''.

SEC. 5. COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND BURNOUT.

    Subpart 1 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 294n et seq.), as amended by section 4, is further amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 764B. COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL MENTAL AND 
              BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND BURNOUT.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
stakeholders, shall conduct a review and submit recommendations to 
Congress on policies to improve health care professional mental health 
and prevent burnout.
    ``(b) Considerations.--The study under subsection (a) shall focus 
on identifying--
            ``(1) the factors that contribute to mental and behavioral 
        health conditions and burnout among health care professionals;
            ``(2) the barriers to seeking and accessing mental and 
        behavioral health treatment for health care professionals, 
        including stigma and concerns about licensing and 
        credentialing;
            ``(3) the implications of poor mental and behavioral health 
        and burnout among health care professionals for the health care 
        system, the health care workforce, and patient outcomes;
            ``(4) the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on the mental 
        and behavioral health of health care professionals and related 
        preparedness strategies for future health emergencies;
            ``(5) the factors that promote mental and behavioral health 
        and resiliency among health care professionals, including 
        programs or protocols that strengthen mental and behavioral 
        health or prevent burnout among health care professionals; and
            ``(6) the efficacy of health professional training programs 
        that promote resiliency and improve mental health.
    ``(c) Recommendations.--The study required under subsection (a) 
shall include recommendations related to--
            ``(1) improving mental and behavioral health and preventing 
        burnout among health care professionals;
            ``(2) removing barriers to mental and behavioral health 
        care for health care professionals; and
            ``(3) strategies to promote resiliency among health care 
        professionals and other employees and contractors in health 
        care settings.
    ``(d) Completion.--The Secretary shall ensure that the study under 
subsection (a) is completed and submitted to Congress and made publicly 
available not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this 
section.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $3,000,000 for the period of 
fiscal years 2021 through 2023.''.

[Congressional Bills 109th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4024 Introduced in Senate (IS)]








109th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 4024

   To amend the Public Health Service Act to improve the health and 
  healthcare of racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                              populations.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                           September 29, 2006

   Mr. Frist (for himself, Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Obama, and Mr. Bingaman) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
          Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
   To amend the Public Health Service Act to improve the health and 
  healthcare of racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                              populations.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Minority Health 
Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
                    TITLE I--EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Sec. 101. Cultural competency and communication for providers.
Sec. 102. Healthcare workforce, education, and training.
Sec. 103. Workforce training to achieve diversity.
Sec. 104. Mid-career health professions scholarship program.
Sec. 105. Cultural competency training.
Sec. 106. Authorization of appropriations; reauthorizations.
                       TITLE II--CARE AND ACCESS

Sec. 201. Care and access.
Sec. 202. Authorization of appropriations.
                          TITLE III--RESEARCH

Sec. 301. Agency for healthcare research and quality.
Sec. 302. Genetic variation and health.
Sec. 303. Evaluations by the Institute of Medicine.
Sec. 304. National Center for Minority Health and Health Disparities 
                            reauthorization.
Sec. 305. Authorization of appropriations.
            TITLE IV--DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY

Sec. 401. Data collection, analysis, and quality.
      TITLE V--LEADERSHIP, COLLABORATION, AND NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

Sec. 501. Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

    In this Act and the amendments made by this Act:
            (1) Cultural competency.--The term ``culturally 
        competent''--
                    (A) when used to describe health-related services, 
                means providing healthcare tailored to meet the social, 
                cultural, and linguistic needs of patients from diverse 
                backgrounds; and
                    (B) when used to describe education or training, 
                means education or training designed to prepare those 
                receiving the education or training to provide health-
                related services tailored to meet the social, cultural, 
                and linguistic needs of patients from diverse 
                backgrounds.
            (2) Health disparity population.--The term ``health 
        disparity population'' has the meaning given such term in 
        section 903(d)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
        299a-1(d)(1)).
            (3) Health literacy.--The term ``health literacy'' means 
        the degree to which an individual has the capacity to obtain, 
        communicate, process, and understand health information 
        (including the language in which the information is provided) 
        and services in order to make appropriate health decisions.
            (4) Minority group.--The term ``minority group'' has the 
        meaning given the term ``racial and ethnic minority group'' in 
        section 1707 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-
        6) (as amended by section 501).
            (5) Practice-based research networks.--The term ``practice-
        based research network'' means a group of ambulatory practices 
        devoted principally to the primary care of patients, and 
        affiliated in their mission to investigate questions related to 
        community-based practice and to improve the quality of primary 
        care.
            (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services.

                    TITLE I--EDUCATION AND TRAINING

SEC. 101. CULTURAL COMPETENCY AND COMMUNICATION FOR PROVIDERS.

    Title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 202 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 270. INTERNET CLEARINGHOUSE TO IMPROVE CULTURAL COMPETENCY AND 
              COMMUNICATION BY HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of the Minority Health Improvement and Health Disparity 
Elimination Act, the Secretary, acting through the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination, shall 
assist providers to improve the health and healthcare of racial and 
ethnic minority and other health disparity populations by developing 
and maintaining an Internet Clearinghouse within the Office of Minority 
Health and Health Disparity Elimination that--
            ``(1) increases cultural competency;
            ``(2) improves communication between healthcare providers, 
        staff, and their patients, including those patients with low 
        functional health literacy;
            ``(3) improves healthcare quality and patient satisfaction;
            ``(4) reduces medical errors and healthcare costs; and
            ``(5) reduces duplication of effort regarding translation 
        of materials.
    ``(b) Internet Clearinghouse.--Not later than 12 months after the 
date of enactment of this section the Secretary, acting through the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and Health Disparity 
Elimination, and in consultation with the Director of the Office for 
Civil Rights, shall carry out subsection (a) by--
            ``(1) developing and maintaining, through the Office of 
        Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination, an accessible 
        library and database on the Internet with easily searchable, 
        clinically-relevant information regarding culturally competent 
        healthcare for racial and ethnic minority and other health 
        disparity populations, including Internet links to additional 
        resources that fulfill the purpose of this section;
            ``(2) developing and making templates for visual aids and 
        standard documents with clear explanations that can help 
        patients and consumers access and make informed decisions about 
        healthcare, including--
                    ``(A) administrative and legal documents, including 
                informed consent and advanced directives;
                    ``(B) clinical information, including information 
                pertaining to treatment adherence, self-management 
                training for chronic conditions, preventing 
                transmission of disease, and discharge instructions;
                    ``(C) patient education and outreach materials, 
                including immunization or screening notices and health 
                warnings; and
                    ``(D) Federal health forms and notices;
            ``(3) ensuring that documents described in paragraph (2) 
        are posted in English and non-English languages and are 
        culturally appropriate;
            ``(4) encouraging healthcare providers to customize such 
        documents for their use;
            ``(5) facilitating access to such documents, including 
        distribution in both paper and electronic formats;
            ``(6) providing technical assistance to healthcare 
        providers with respect to the access and use of information 
        described in paragraph (1) including information to help 
        healthcare providers--
                    ``(A) understand the concept of cultural 
                competence;
                    ``(B) implement culturally competent practices;
                    ``(C) care for patients with low functional health 
                literacy, including helping such patients understand 
                and participate in healthcare decisions;
                    ``(D) understand and apply Federal guidance and 
                directives regarding healthcare for racial and ethnic 
                minority and other health disparity populations;
                    ``(E) obtain reimbursement for provision of 
                culturally competent services;
                    ``(F) understand and implement bioinformatics and 
                health information technology in order to improve 
                healthcare for racial and ethnic minority and other 
                health disparity populations; and
                    ``(G) conduct other activities determined 
                appropriate by the Secretary;
            ``(7) providing educational materials to patients, 
        representatives of community-based organizations, and the 
        public with respect to the access and use of information 
        described in paragraph (1), including--
                    ``(A) information to help such individuals--
                            ``(i) understand the concept of cultural 
                        competence, and the role of cultural competence 
                        in the delivery of healthcare;
                            ``(ii) work with healthcare providers to 
                        implement culturally competent practices; and
                            ``(iii) understand the concept of low 
                        functional health literacy, and the barriers it 
                        presents to care; and
                    ``(B) other material determined appropriate by the 
                Secretary; and
            ``(8) supporting initiatives that the Secretary determines 
        to be useful to fulfill the purposes of the Internet 
        Clearinghouse.
    ``(c) Definitions.--The definitions contained in section 2 of the 
Minority Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act shall 
apply for purposes of this section.''.

SEC. 102. HEALTHCARE WORKFORCE, EDUCATION, AND TRAINING.

    (a) In General.--Part F of title VII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 295j et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 792 
the following:

``SEC. 793. HEALTHCARE WORKFORCE, EDUCATION, AND TRAINING.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration and the Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and Health Disparity 
Elimination, shall establish an aggregated and disaggregated database 
on health professional students, including applicants, matriculates, 
and graduates.
    ``(b) Requirement To Collect Data.--
            ``(1) In general.--Each health professions school described 
        in paragraph (2) that receives Federal funds, shall collect 
        race and ethnicity data, primary language data, and other 
        health disparity data, as feasible and pursuant to subsection 
        (d), concerning the students described in subsection (a), as 
        well as intended geographical site of practice and intended 
        discipline of practice for graduates. In collecting such data, 
        a school shall--
                    ``(A) at a minimum, use the categories for race and 
                ethnicity established by the Director of the Office of 
                Management and Budget in effect on the date of 
                enactment of the Minority Health Improvement and Health 
                Disparity Elimination Act; and
                    ``(B) if practicable, collect data on additional 
                population groups if such data can be aggregated into 
                the minimum race and ethnicity data categories.
            ``(2) Health professions school.--A health professions 
        school described under this paragraph is a school of medicine 
        or osteopathic medicine, public health, nursing, dentistry, 
        optometry, pharmacy, allied health, podiatric medicine, or 
        veterinary medicine, or a graduate program in mental health 
        practice.
    ``(c) Reporting.--Each school or program described under subsection 
(b), shall, on an annual basis, report to the Secretary data on race 
and ethnicity and primary language collected under this section for 
inclusion in the database established under subsection (a). The 
Secretary shall ensure that such disparity data is reported to Congress 
and made available to the public.
    ``(d) Health Disparity Measures.--The Secretary shall develop, 
report, and disseminate measures of the other health data referenced in 
section 793(b)(1), to ensure uniform and consistent collection and 
reporting of these measures by health professions schools. In 
developing such measures, the Secretary shall take into consideration 
health disparity indicators developed pursuant to section 2901(c).
    ``(e) Use of Data.--Data reported pursuant to subsection (c) shall 
be used by the Secretary to conduct ongoing short- and long-term 
analyses of diversity within health professions schools and the health 
professions. The Secretary shall ensure that such analyses are reported 
to Congress and made available to the public.
    ``(f) Cultural Competency Training.--The Secretary shall collect 
and report data from health professions schools regarding the extent to 
which cultural competency training is provided to health professions 
students, and conduct periodic assessments regarding the preparedness 
of such students to care for patients from racial and ethnic minority 
and other health disparity populations.
    ``(g) Privacy.--The Secretary shall ensure that all data collected 
under this section is protected from inappropriate internal and 
external use by any entity that collects, stores, or receives the data 
and that such data is collected without personally identifiable 
information.
    ``(h) Partnership.--The Secretary may contract with external 
entities to fulfill the requirements under this section if such 
entities have demonstrated expertise and experience collecting, 
analyzing, and reporting data required under this section for health 
professional students.''.
    (b) National Health Service Corps Program.--
            (1) Assignment of corps personnel.--Section 333(a)(3) of 
        the Public Health Service Corps (42 U.S.C. 254f(a)(3)) is 
        amended to read as follows:
            ``(3)(A) In approving applications for assignment of 
        members of the Corps the Secretary shall not discriminate 
        against application from entities which are not receiving 
        Federal financial assistance under this Act.
            ``(B) In approving such applications, the Secretary shall--
                    ``(i) give preference to applications in which a 
                nonprofit entity or public entity shall provide a site 
                to which Corps members may be assigned; and
                    ``(ii) give highest preference to applications--
                            ``(I) from entities described in clause (i) 
                        that are federally qualified health centers as 
                        defined in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social 
                        Security Act; and
                            ``(II) from entities described in clause 
                        (i) that primarily serve racial and ethnic 
                        minority and other health disparity populations 
                        with annual incomes at or below twice those set 
                        forth in the most recent poverty guidelines 
                        issued by the Secretary pursuant to section 
                        673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant 
                        Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)).''.
            (2) Priorities in assignment of corps personnel.--Section 
        333A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254f-1) is 
        amended--
                    (A) in subsection (a)--
                            (i) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), 
                        and (3) as paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), 
                        respectively; and
                            (ii) by striking ``shall--'' and inserting 
                        ``shall--
            ``(1) give preference to applications as set forth in 
        subsection (a)(3) of section 333;''; and
                    (B) by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' each place it 
                appears and inserting ``subsection (a)(2)''.
            (3) Conforming amendment.--Section 338I(c)(3)(B)(ii) of the 
        Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254q-1(c)(3)(B)(ii)) is 
        amended by striking ``section 333A(a)(1)'' and inserting 
        ``section 333A(a)(2)''.

SEC. 103. WORKFORCE TRAINING TO ACHIEVE DIVERSITY.

    (a) Centers of Excellence.--Section 736 of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293) is amended--
            (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following:
    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to, and enter 
into contracts with, public and nonprofit private health or educational 
entities, including designated health professions schools described in 
subsection (c), for the purpose of assisting the entities in supporting 
programs of excellence in health professions education for 
underrepresented minorities in health professions.'';
            (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
    ``(b) Required Use of Funds.--The Secretary may not make a grant 
under subsection (a) unless the designated health professions school 
involved agrees, subject to subsection (c)(1)(C), to use the funds 
awarded under the grant to--
            ``(1) develop a large competitive applicant pool through 
        linkages with institutions of higher education, local school 
        districts, and other community-based entities and establish an 
        education pipeline for health professions careers;
            ``(2) establish, strengthen, or expand programs to enhance 
        the academic performance of underrepresented minority in health 
        professions students attending the school;
            ``(3) improve the capacity of such school to train, 
        recruit, and retain underrepresented minority faculty members 
        including the payment of such stipends and fellowships as the 
        Secretary may determine appropriate;
            ``(4) carry out activities to improve the information 
        resources, clinical education, curricula, and cultural and 
        linguistic competence of the graduates of the school, as it 
        relates to minority health and other health disparity issues;
            ``(5) facilitate faculty and student research on health 
        issues particularly affecting racial and ethnic minority and 
        other health disparity populations, including research on 
        issues relating to the delivery of culturally competent 
        healthcare (as defined in section 270);
            ``(6) carry out a program to train students of the school 
        in providing health services to racial and ethnic minority and 
        other health disparity populations (as defined in section 
        903(d)(1)) through training provided to such students at 
        community-based health facilities that--
                    ``(A) provide such health services; and
                    ``(B) are located at a site remote from the main 
                site of the teaching facilities of the school;
            ``(7) provide stipends as the Secretary determines 
        appropriate, in amounts as the Secretary determines 
        appropriate; and
            ``(8) conduct accountability and other reporting 
        activities, as required by the Secretary in subsection (i).'';
            (3) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
            ``(1) Designated schools.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The designated health 
                professions schools referred to in subsection (a) are 
                such schools that meet each of the conditions specified 
                in subparagraphs (B) and (C), and that--
                            ``(i) meet each of the conditions specified 
                        in paragraph (2)(A);
                            ``(ii) meet each of the conditions 
                        specified in paragraph (3);
                            ``(iii) meet each of the conditions 
                        specified in paragraph (4); or
                            ``(iv) meet each of the conditions 
                        specified in paragraph (5).
                    ``(B) General conditions.--The conditions specified 
                in this subparagraph are that a designated health 
                professions school--
                            ``(i) has a significant number of 
                        underrepresented minority in health professions 
                        students enrolled in the school, including 
                        individuals accepted for enrollment in the 
                        school;
                            ``(ii) has been effective in assisting such 
                        students of the school to complete the program 
                        of education and receive the degree involved;
                            ``(iii) has been effective in recruiting 
                        such students to enroll in and graduate from 
                        the school, including providing scholarships 
                        and other financial assistance to such students 
                        and encouraging such students from all levels 
                        of the educational pipeline to pursue health 
                        professions careers; and
                            ``(iv) has made significant recruitment 
                        efforts to increase the number of 
                        underrepresented minority in health professions 
                        individuals serving in faculty or 
                        administrative positions at the school.
                    ``(C) Consortium.--The condition specified in this 
                subparagraph is that, in accordance with subsection 
                (e)(1), the designated health profession school 
                involved has with other health profession schools 
                (designated or otherwise) formed a consortium to carry 
                out the purposes described in subsection (b) at the 
                schools of the consortium.
                    ``(D) Application of criteria to other programs.--
                In the case of any criteria established by the 
                Secretary for purposes of determining whether schools 
                meet the conditions described in subparagraph (B), this 
                section may not, with respect to racial and ethnic 
                minorities, be construed to authorize, require, or 
                prohibit the use of such criteria in any program other 
                than the program established in this section.'';
                    (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
            ``(2) Centers of excellence at certain historically black 
        colleges and universities.--
                    ``(A) Conditions.--The conditions specified in this 
                subparagraph are that a designated health professions 
                school is a school described in section 799B(1).
                    ``(B) Use of grant.--In addition to the purposes 
                described in subsection (b), a grant under subsection 
                (a) to a designated health professions school meeting 
                the conditions described in subparagraph (A) may be 
                expended--
                            ``(i) to develop a plan to achieve 
                        institutional improvements, including financial 
                        independence, to enable the school to support 
                        programs of excellence in health professions 
                        education for underrepresented minority 
                        individuals; and
                            ``(ii) to provide improved access to the 
                        library and informational resources of the 
                        school.
                    ``(C) Exception.--The requirements of paragraph 
                (1)(C) shall not apply to a historically black college 
                or university that receives funding under this 
                paragraph or paragraph (5).''; and
                    (C) by amending paragraphs (3) through (5) to read 
                as follows:
            ``(3) Hispanic centers of excellence.--The conditions 
        specified in this paragraph are that--
                    ``(A) with respect to Hispanic individuals, each of 
                clauses (i) through (iv) of paragraph (1)(B) applies to 
                the designated health professions school involved;
                    ``(B) the school agrees, as a condition of 
                receiving a grant under subsection (a) of this section, 
                that the school will, in carrying out the duties 
                described in subsection (b) of this section, give 
                priority to carrying out the duties with respect to 
                Hispanic individuals; and
                    ``(C) the school agrees, as a condition of 
                receiving a grant under subsection (a) of this section, 
                that--
                            ``(i) the school will establish an 
                        arrangement with 1 or more public or nonprofit 
                        community-based Hispanic serving organizations, 
                        or public or nonprofit private institutions of 
                        higher education, including schools of nursing, 
                        whose enrollment of students has traditionally 
                        included a significant number of Hispanic 
                        individuals, the purposes of which will be to 
                        cary out a program--
                                    ``(I) to identify Hispanic students 
                                who are interested in a career in the 
                                health profession involved; and
                                    ``(II) to facilitate the 
                                educational preparation of such 
                                students to enter the health 
                                professions school; and
                            ``(ii) the school will make efforts to 
                        recruit Hispanic students, including students 
                        who have participated in the undergraduate or 
                        other matriculation program carried out under 
                        arrangements established by the school pursuant 
                        to clause (i)(II) and will assist Hispanic 
                        students regarding the completion of the 
                        educational requirements for a degree from the 
                        school.
            ``(4) Native american centers of excellence.--Subject to 
        subsection (e), the conditions specified in this paragraph are 
        that--
                    ``(A) with respect to Native Americans, each of 
                clauses (i) through (iv) of paragraph (1)(B) applies to 
                the designated health professions school involved;
                    ``(B) the school agrees, as a condition of 
                receiving a grant under subsection (a) of this section, 
                that the school will, in carrying out the duties 
                described in subsection (b) of this section, give 
                priority to carrying out the duties with respect to 
                Native Americans; and
                    ``(C) the school agrees, as a condition of 
                receiving a grant under subsection (a) of this section, 
                that--
                            ``(i) the school will establish an 
                        arrangement with 1 or more public or nonprofit 
                        private institutions of higher education, 
                        including schools of nursing, whose enrollment 
                        of students has traditionally included a 
                        significant number of Native Americans, the 
                        purpose of which arrangement will be to carry 
                        out a program--
                                    ``(I) to identify Native American 
                                students, from the institutions of 
                                higher education referred to in clause 
                                (i), who are interested in health 
                                professions careers; and
                                    ``(II) to facilitate the 
                                educational preparation of such 
                                students to enter the designated health 
                                professions school; and
                            ``(ii) the designated health professions 
                        school will make efforts to recruit Native 
                        American students, including students who have 
                        participated in the undergraduate program 
                        carried out under arrangements established by 
                        the school pursuant to clause (i) and will 
                        assist Native American students regarding the 
                        completion of the educational requirements for 
                        a degree from the designated health professions 
                        school.
            ``(5) Other centers of excellence.--The conditions 
        specified in this paragraph are--
                    ``(A) with respect to other centers of excellence, 
                the conditions described in clauses (i) through (iv) of 
                paragraph (1)(B); and
                    ``(B) that the health professions school involved 
                has an enrollment of underrepresented minorities in 
                health professions significantly above the national 
                average for such enrollments of health professions 
                schools.''; and
            (4) by striking subsection (h) and inserting the following:
    ``(h) Formula for Allocations.--
            ``(1) Allocations.--Based on the amount appropriated under 
        section 106(a) of the Minority Health Improvement and Health 
        Disparity Elimination Act for a fiscal year, the following 
        subparagraphs shall apply as appropriate:
                    ``(A) In general.--If the amounts appropriated 
                under section 106(a) of the Minority Health Improvement 
                and Health Disparity Elimination Act for a fiscal year 
                are $24,000,000 or less--
                            ``(i) the Secretary shall make available 
                        $12,000,000 for grants under subsection (a) to 
                        health professions schools that meet the 
                        conditions described in subsection (c)(2)(A); 
                        and
                            ``(ii) and available after grants are made 
                        with funds under clause (i), the Secretary 
                        shall make available--
                                    ``(I) 60 percent of such amount for 
                                grants under subsection (a) to health 
                                professions schools that meet the 
                                conditions described in paragraph (3) 
                                or (4) of subsection (c) (including 
                                meeting the conditions under subsection 
                                (e)); and
                                    ``(II) 40 percent of such amount 
                                for grants under subsection (a) to 
                                health professions schools that meet 
                                the conditions described in subsection 
                                (c)(5).
                    ``(B) Funding in excess of $24,000,000.--If amounts 
                appropriated under section 106(a) of the Minority 
                Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act 
                for a fiscal year exceed $24,000,000 but are less than 
                $30,000,000--
                            ``(i) 80 percent of such excess amounts 
                        shall be made available for grants under 
                        subsection (a) to health professions schools 
                        that meet the requirements described in 
                        paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (c) 
                        (including meeting conditions pursuant to 
                        subsection (e)); and
                            ``(ii) 20 percent of such excess amount 
                        shall be made available for grants under 
                        subsection (a) to health professions schools 
                        that meet the conditions described in 
                        subsection (c)(5).
                    ``(C) Funding in excess of $30,000,000.--If amounts 
                appropriated under section 106(a) of the Minority 
                Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act 
                for a fiscal year exceed $30,000,000 but are less than 
                $40,000,000, the Secretary shall make available--
                            ``(i) not less than $12,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        subsection (c)(2)(A);
                            ``(ii) not less than $12,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (c) 
                        (including meeting conditions pursuant to 
                        subsection (e));
                            ``(iii) not less than $6,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        subsection (c)(5); and
                            ``(iv) after grants are made with funds 
                        under clauses (i) through (iii), any remaining 
                        excess amount for grants under subsection (a) 
                        to health professions schools that meet the 
                        conditions described in paragraph (2)(A), (3), 
                        (4), or (5) of subsection (c).
                    ``(D) Funding in excess of $40,000,000.--If amounts 
                appropriated under section 106(a) of the Minority 
                Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act 
                for a fiscal year are $40,000,000 or more, the 
                Secretary shall make available--
                            ``(i) not less than $16,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        subsection (c)(2)(A);
                            ``(ii) not less than $16,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (c) 
                        (including meeting conditions pursuant to 
                        subsection (e));
                            ``(iii) not less than $8,000,000 for grants 
                        under subsection (a) to health professions 
                        schools that meet the conditions described in 
                        subsection (c)(5); and
                            ``(iv) after grants are made with funds 
                        under clauses (i) through (iii), any remaining 
                        funds for grants under subsection (a) to health 
                        professions schools that meet the conditions 
                        described in paragraph (2)(A), (3), (4), or (5) 
                        of subsection (c).
            ``(2) No limitation.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
        construed as limiting the centers of excellence referred to in 
        this section to the designated amount, or to preclude such 
        entities from competing for grants under this section.
            ``(3) Maintenance of effort.--
                    ``(A) In general.--With respect to activities for 
                which a grant made under this part are authorized to be 
                expended, the Secretary may not make such a grant to a 
                center of excellence for any fiscal year unless the 
                center agrees to maintain expenditures of non-Federal 
                amounts for such activities at a level that is not less 
                than the level of such expenditures maintained by the 
                center for the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year 
                for which the school receives such a grant.
                    ``(B) Use of federal funds.--With respect to any 
                Federal amounts received by a center of excellence and 
                available for carrying out activities for which a grant 
                under this part is authorized to be expended, the 
                center shall, before expending the grant, expend the 
                Federal amounts obtained from sources other than the 
                grant, unless given prior approval from the Secretary.
    ``(i) Evaluations.--
            ``(1) Advisory committee.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
                date of enactment of the Minority Health Improvement 
                and Health Disparity Elimination Act, the Secretary 
                shall establish and appoint the members of an advisory 
                committee composed of representatives of government 
                agencies, including the Health Resources and Services 
                Administration, the Office of Minority Health and 
                Health Disparity Elimination, and the Indian Health 
                Service, community stakeholders and experts in 
                identifying and addressing the health concerns of 
                racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                populations, and designees from health professions 
                schools described in subsection (b).
                    ``(B) Duties.--The advisory committee shall develop 
                and recommend performance measures with which to 
                assess, based on data to be compiled by recipients of 
                grants or contracts under this section or section 736, 
                737, 738, or 739, the extent to which the program 
                described in this section and sections 736, 737, 738, 
                and 739 has met the purpose of this part. The advisory 
                committee shall submit such recommendations to the 
                Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
                Administration not later than 6 months after the 
                appointment of the advisory committee.
                    ``(C) Notification.--Not later than 30 days after 
                the submission of the recommendations, the 
                Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
                Administration shall review the recommendations and 
                establish performance measures described in 
                subparagraph (B), and the Administrator shall notify 
                recipients of grants or contracts under this section or 
                section 736, 737, 738, or 739 of the new performance 
                measures and make requirements related to the 
                performance measures publicly available both on the 
                website of the Administration and as part of any 
                notifications of awards released to entities receiving 
                the grants or contracts.
            ``(2) Data collection and annual evaluations.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Administrator of the Health 
                Resources and Services Administration shall collect 
                annual data from recipients of grants or contracts 
                under this section or section 736, 737, 738, or 739 on 
                the performance measures established under paragraph 
                (1).
                    ``(B) Biannual meeting.--The Administrator of the 
                Health Resources and Services Administration shall 
                convene a meeting of the advisory committee established 
                under paragraph (1) not less than twice per year. At 
                the meeting, the advisory committee shall recommend any 
                necessary changes to such performance measures to 
                improve data collection and short-term evaluation with 
                respect to the programs carried out under this section 
                or section 736, 737, 738, or 739, and provide technical 
                assistance as necessary.
            ``(3) Updates.--The Administrator of the Health Resources 
        and Services Administration shall determine whether to 
        incorporate the recommended changes as described in paragraph 
        (2)(B) and provide technical assistance as necessary. The 
        Administrator shall not penalize a current recipient of a grant 
        or contract under this section or section 736, 737, 738, or 739 
        for failing to comply with the revised data collection or 
        performance measure requirements if the recipient demonstrates 
        an inability to provide additional data mandated under the 
        requirements.
            ``(4) Accountability.--The Administrator shall review and 
        take into consideration performance measurement data previously 
        collected from recipients of grants or contracts under this 
        section or section 736, 737, 738, or 739 when deciding to renew 
        the grants or contracts of such recipients.''.
    (b) Cooperative Agreements for Online Degree Programs at Schools of 
Public Health and Schools of Allied Health.--Part B of title VII of the 
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293 et seq.) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 742. COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS FOR ONLINE DEGREE PROGRAMS.

    ``(a) Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary shall award 
cooperative agreements to accredited schools of public health, schools 
of allied health, and public health programs to design and implement a 
degree program over the Internet (referred to in this section as an 
`online degree program').
    ``(b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a cooperative 
agreement under subsection (a), an accredited school of public health, 
school of allied health, or public health program shall submit an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Priority.--In awarding cooperative agreements under this 
section, the Secretary shall give priority to any accredited school of 
public health, school of allied health, or public health program that 
serves a disproportionate number of individuals from racial and ethnic 
minority and other health disparity populations.
    ``(d) Requirements.--Awardees shall use an award under subsection 
(a) to design and implement an online degree program that meets the 
following conditions:
            ``(1) Limiting enrollment to individuals who have obtained 
        a secondary school diploma or a recognized equivalent.
            ``(2) Maintaining significant enrollment and graduation of 
        underrepresented minorities in health professions.''.
    (c) Definition.--Part B of title VII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 293 et seq.) is amended by inserting after the part 
heading the following:

``SEC. 735A. APPLICATION OF DEFINITION.

    ``The definition contained in section 738(b)(5) shall apply for 
purposes of this part, except that such definition shall also apply in 
the case of references to `underrepresented minority students', 
`underrepresented minority faculty members', `underrepresented minority 
faculty administrators', and `underrepresented minorities in health 
professions'.''.

SEC. 104. MID-CAREER HEALTH PROFESSIONS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.

    Subpart 2 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 295 et seq.) is amended--
            (1) in section 770, by inserting ``(other than section 
        771)'' after ``this subpart'';
            (2) by redesignating section 770 as section 771; and
            (3) by inserting after section 769 the following:

``SEC. 770. MID-CAREER HEALTH PROFESSIONS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to eligible 
schools to award scholarships to eligible individuals to attend the 
school involved, for the purpose of enabling the individuals to make a 
career change from a non-health profession to a health profession.
    ``(b) Application.--To receive a grant under this section, an 
eligible school shall submit to the Secretary an application at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--Amounts awarded as a scholarship under this 
section may be expended only for tuition expenses, other reasonable 
educational expenses, and reasonable living expenses incurred in the 
attendance of the school involved.
    ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
            ``(1) Eligible school.--The term `eligible school' means an 
        accredited school of medicine, osteopathic medicine, dentistry, 
        nursing, pharmacy, podiatric medicine, optometry, veterinary 
        medicine, public health, chiropractic, allied health, a school 
        offering a graduate program in behavioral and mental health 
        practice, or an entity providing programs for the training of 
        physician assistants.
            ``(2) Eligible individual.--The term `eligible individual' 
        means an individual who is an underrepresented minority 
        individual who has obtained a secondary school diploma or its 
        recognized equivalent.''.

SEC. 105. CULTURAL COMPETENCY TRAINING.

    Part B of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293 
et seq.), as amended by section 104, is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 743. CULTURAL COMPETENCY TRAINING.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator 
of the Health Resources and Services Administration and in 
collaboration with the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity 
Elimination and Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall 
support the development, evaluation, and dissemination of model 
curricula for cultural competency training for use in health 
professions schools and continuing education programs, and other 
purposes determined appropriate by the Secretary.
    ``(b) Curricula.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall collaborate with health professional societies, licensing and 
accreditation entities, health professions schools, and experts in 
minority health and cultural competency, and other organizations as 
determined appropriate by the Secretary. Such curricula shall include a 
focus on cultural competency measures and cultural competency self-
assessment methodology for health providers, systems and institutions.
    ``(c) Dissemination.--
            ``(1) In general.--Such model curricula should be 
        disseminated through the Internet Clearinghouse under section 
        270 and other means as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
            ``(2) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate adoption 
        and the implementation of cultural competency training 
        curricula, and facilitate inclusion of cultural competency 
        measures in quality measurement systems as appropriate.''.

SEC. 106. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; REAUTHORIZATIONS.

    (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated--
            (1) such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
        2007 through 2011, to carry out the amendments made by sections 
        101 and 102 of this title (adding sections 270 and 793 to the 
        Public Health Service Act);
            (2) $45,000,000 for fiscal year 2007, and such sums as may 
        be necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011, to 
        carry out the amendments made by section 103(a) (relating to 
        centers of excellence in section 736 of the Public Health 
        Service Act);
            (3) such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
        2007 through 2011, to carry out the amendments made by section 
        103(b) (adding section 742 to the Public Health Service Act);
            (4) such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
        2007 through 2011, to carry out the amendments made by section 
        104(b) (adding section 770 to the Public Health Service Act); 
        and
            (5) such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
        2007 through 2011, to carry out the amendment made by section 
        105 (adding section 743 to the Public Health Service Act).
    (b) Reauthorizations.--The following programs are reauthorized as 
follows:
            (1) Educational assistance in the health professions 
        regarding individuals from disadvantaged background.--Section 
        740(c) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293a(c)) is 
        amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the 
        following: ``For the purpose of grants and contracts under 
        section 739(a)(1), there is authorized to be appropriated 
        $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and such sums as may be 
        necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011.''.
            (2) Scholarships for disadvantaged students.--Section 
        740(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293a(a)) is 
        amended by striking ``$37,000,000'' and all that follows 
        through ``through 2002'' and inserting ``$51,000,000 for fiscal 
        year 2007, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
        years 2008 through 2011''.
            (3) Loan repayments and fellowships.--Section 740(b) of the 
        Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293a(b)) is amended by 
        striking ``$1,100,000'' and all that follows through ``through 
        2002'' and inserting ``$1,700,000 for fiscal year 2007, and 
        such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 
        through 2011''.
            (4) Grants for health professions education.--Section 741 
        of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293e) is amended in 
        subsection (b), by striking ``$3,500,000'' and all that follows 
        through the period and inserting ``such sums as may be 
        necessary for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011.''.

                       TITLE II--CARE AND ACCESS

SEC. 201. CARE AND ACCESS.

    Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.) is amended by--
            (1) redesignating the second section 339O (as added by 
        section 504 of the Violence Against Women and Department of 
        Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005) as section 399P; and
            (2) adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399Q. ACCESS, AWARENESS, AND OUTREACH ACTIVITIES.

    ``(a) Demonstration Projects.--The Secretary shall award multiyear 
contracts or competitive grants to eligible entities to support 
demonstration projects designed to improve the health and healthcare of 
racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity populations 
through improved access to healthcare, patient navigators, and health 
literacy education and services.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--In this section:
            ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an 
        organization or a community-based consortium.
            ``(2) Organization.--The term `organization' means--
                    ``(A) a hospital, health plan, or clinic;
                    ``(B) an academic institution;
                    ``(C) a State health agency;
                    ``(D) an Indian Health Service hospital or clinic, 
                Indian tribal health facility, or urban Indian 
                facility;
                    ``(E) a nonprofit organization, including a faith-
                based organization or consortium, to the extent that a 
                contract or grant awarded to such an entity is 
                consistent with the requirements of section 1955;
                    ``(F) a primary care practice-based research 
                network; and
                    ``(G) any other similar entity determined to be 
                appropriate by the Secretary.
            ``(3) Community-based consortium.--The term `community-
        based consortium' means a partnership that--
                    ``(A) includes--
                            ``(i) individuals who are representatives 
                        of organizations of racial and ethnic minority 
                        and other health disparity populations;
                            ``(ii) community leaders and leaders of 
                        community-based organizations;
                            ``(iii) healthcare providers, including 
                        providers who treat racial and ethnic minority 
                        and other health disparity populations; and
                            ``(iv) experts in the area of social and 
                        behavioral science, who have knowledge, 
                        training, or practical experience in health 
                        policy, advocacy, cultural or linguistic 
                        competency, or other relevant areas as 
                        determined by the Secretary; and
                    ``(B) is located within a federally- or State-
                designated medically underserved area, a federally 
                designated health provider shortage area, or an area 
                with a significant population of racial and ethnic 
                minorities.
    ``(c) Application.--An eligible entity seeking a contract or grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require, including assurances that the eligible entity will--
            ``(1) target populations that are members of racial and 
        ethnic minority groups and health disparity populations through 
        specific outreach activities;
            ``(2) collaborate with appropriate community organizations 
        and include meaningful community participation in planning, 
        implementation, and evaluation of activities;
            ``(3) demonstrate capacity to promote culturally competent 
        and appropriate care for target populations with consideration 
        for health literacy;
            ``(4) develop a plan for long-term sustainability;
            ``(5) evaluate the effectiveness of activities under this 
        section, within an appropriate timeframe, which shall include a 
        focus on quality and outcomes performance measures to ensure 
        that the activities are meeting the intended goals, and that 
        the entity is able to disseminate findings from such 
        evaluations;
            ``(6) provide ongoing outreach and education to the health 
        disparity populations served;
            ``(7) demonstrate coordination between public and private 
        entities; and
            ``(8) assist individuals and groups in accessing public and 
        private programs that will help eliminate disparities in health 
        and healthcare.
    ``(d) Priorities.--In awarding contracts and grants under this 
section, the Secretary shall give priority to applicants that are--
            ``(1) safety-net hospitals, defined as hospitals with a low 
        income utilization rate (as defined in Section 1923(b)(3) of 
        the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C 1396r-4(b)(3))) greater than 
        25 percent;
            ``(2) community health centers, as defined in section 
        1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396d(l)(2)(B)); and
            ``(3) other health systems that--
                    ``(A) by legal mandate or explicitly adopted 
                mission, provide patients with access to services 
                regardless of their ability to pay;
                    ``(B) provide care or treatment for a substantial 
                number of patients who are uninsured, are receiving 
                assistance under a State program under title XIX of the 
                Social Security Act, or are members of vulnerable 
                populations, as determined by the Secretary;
                    ``(C) serve a disproportionate percentage of 
                patients from racial and ethnic minority and other 
                health disparity populations;
                    ``(D) provide an assurance that amounts received 
                under the grant or contract will be used to implement 
                strategies that address patients' linguistic needs, 
                where necessary, and recruit and maintain diverse staff 
                and leadership; and
                    ``(E) provide an assurance that amounts received 
                under the grant or contract will be used to support 
                quality improvement activities for patients from racial 
                and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                populations.
    ``(e) Use of Funds.--An eligible entity shall use such amounts 
received under this section for demonstration projects to--
            ``(1) address health disparities in the United States-
        Mexico Border Area, as defined in section 8 of the United 
        States-Mexico Border Health Commission Act (22 U.S.C. 290n-6), 
        relating to health disparities in the areas of--
                    ``(A) maternal and child health;
                    ``(B) primary care and preventive health, including 
                health education and promotion;
                    ``(C) public health and public infrastructure;
                    ``(D) oral health;
                    ``(E) behavioral and mental health and substance 
                abuse;
                    ``(F) health conditions that have a 
                disproportionate impact on racial and ethnic minorities 
                and a high prevalence in the Border Area;
                    ``(G) health services research;
                    ``(H) the health impacts of exposure to 
                environmental hazards;
                    ``(I) workforce training and development; or
                    ``(J) other areas determined appropriate by the 
                Secretary;
            ``(2) implement the best practices in disease management, 
        including those that address co-occurring chronic conditions, 
        as defined by the public- private partnership established under 
        section 918(b), target patients with low functional health 
        literacy, and, as feasible, incorporate health information 
        technology;
            ``(3) evaluate methods for strengthening the health 
        coverage of, and continuity of coverage of, migratory 
        agricultural workers and seasonal agricultural workers, as such 
        terms are defined in section 330(g), and workers in other 
        industries with traditionally low rates of employer-sponsored 
        health insurance;
            ``(4) train community health workers to educate, guide, and 
        provide outreach in a community setting regarding problems 
        prevalent among medically underserved populations (as defined 
        in section 330(b)); or
            ``(5) identify, educate, and enroll eligible patients from 
        racial and ethnic minorities and other health disparity 
        populations into clinical trials.
    ``(f) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date an entity 
receives a contract or grant under this section and annually 
thereafter, the entity shall provide to the Secretary a report 
containing the results of any evaluation conducted pursuant to 
subsection (c)(5).
    ``(g) Dissemination of Findings.--The Secretary shall, as 
appropriate, disseminate to public and private entities, including 
Congress, the findings made in evaluations described under subsection 
(f).

``SEC. 399R. GRANTS FOR RACIAL AND ETHNIC APPROACHES TO COMMUNITY 
              HEALTH.

    ``(a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to provide for 
the awarding of grants to assist communities in mobilizing and 
organizing resources in support of effective and sustainable programs 
that will reduce or eliminate disparities in health and healthcare 
experienced by racial and ethnic minority individuals.
    ``(b) Authority To Award Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Office of Minority 
Health and Health Disparity Elimination, shall award planning, 
implementation, and evaluation grants to eligible entities to assist in 
designing, implementing, and evaluating culturally and linguistically 
appropriate, science-based and community-driven sustainable strategies 
to eliminate racial and ethnic health and healthcare disparities.
    ``(c) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall--
            ``(1) represent a coalition--
                    ``(A) whose principal purpose is to develop and 
                implement interventions to reduce or eliminate a health 
                or healthcare disparity in a targeted racial or ethnic 
                minority group in the community served by the 
                coalition; and
                    ``(B) that includes--
                            ``(i) at least 3 members selected from 
                        among--
                                    ``(I) public health departments;
                                    ``(II) community-based 
                                organizations;
                                    ``(III) university and research 
                                organizations;
                                    ``(IV) American Indian tribal 
                                organizations, national American Indian 
                                organizations, Indian Health Service, 
                                or organizations serving Alaska 
                                Natives;
                                    ``(V) organizations serving Native 
                                Hawaiians;
                                    ``(VI) organizations serving 
                                Pacific Islanders; and
                                    ``(VII) interested public or 
                                private healthcare providers or 
                                organizations as deemed appropriate by 
                                the Secretary; and
                            ``(ii) at least 1 member from a community-
                        based organization that represents the targeted 
                        racial or ethnic minority group; and
            ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
        in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require, which shall include--
                    ``(A) a description of the targeted racial or 
                ethnic population in the community to be served under 
                the grant;
                    ``(B) a description of at least 1 health disparity 
                that exists in the racial or ethnic targeted 
                population, including infant mortality, breast and 
                cervical cancer screening and management, 
                cardiovascular disease, diabetes, child and adult 
                immunization levels, or HIV/AIDS; and
                    ``(C) a demonstration of a proven record of 
                accomplishment of the coalition members in serving and 
                working with the targeted community.
    ``(d) Planning Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award one-time 
        grants to eligible entities described in subsection (c) to 
        support the planning and development of culturally and 
        linguistically appropriate programs that utilize science-based 
        and community-driven strategies to reduce or eliminate a health 
        or healthcare disparity in the targeted population. Such grants 
        may be used to--
                    ``(A) expand the coalition that is represented by 
                the eligible entity through the identification of 
                additional partners, particularly among the targeted 
                community, and establish linkages with national, State, 
                tribal, or local public and private partners which may 
                include community health workers, advocacy, and policy 
                organizations;
                    ``(B) establish community working groups;
                    ``(C) conduct a needs assessment of the community 
                and targeted population to determine a health disparity 
                and the factors contributing to that disparity, using 
                input from the targeted community;
                    ``(D) participate in workshops sponsored by the 
                Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity 
                Elimination or the Centers for Disease Control and 
                Prevention for technical assistance, planning, 
                evaluation, and other programmatic issues;
                    ``(E) identify promising intervention strategies; 
                and
                    ``(F) develop a plan with the input of the targeted 
                community that includes strategies for--
                            ``(i) implementing intervention strategies 
                        that have the greatest potential for reducing 
                        the health disparity in the target population;
                            ``(ii) identifying other sources of revenue 
                        and integrating current and proposed funding 
                        sources to ensure long-term sustainability of 
                        the program; and
                            ``(iii) evaluating the program, including 
                        collecting data and measuring progress toward 
                        reducing or eliminating the health disparity in 
                        the targeted population that takes into account 
                        the evaluation model developed by the Centers 
                        for Disease Control and Prevention in 
                        collaboration with the Office of Minority 
                        Health and Health Disparity Elimination.
            ``(2) Duration.--The period during which payments may be 
        made under a grant under paragraph (1) shall not exceed 1 year, 
        except where the Secretary determines that extraordinary 
        circumstances exist as described in section 340(c)(3).
    ``(e) Implementation Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
        eligible entities that have received a planning grant under 
        subsection (d) to enable such entity to--
                    ``(A) implement a plan to address the selected 
                health disparity for the target population, in an 
                effective and timely manner;
                    ``(B) collect data appropriate for monitoring and 
                evaluating the program carried out under the grant;
                    ``(C) analyze and interpret data, or collaborate 
                with academic or other appropriate institutions, for 
                such analysis and collection;
                    ``(D) participate in conferences and workshops for 
                the purpose of informing and educating others regarding 
                the experiences and lessons learned from the project;
                    ``(E) collaborate with appropriate partners to 
                publish the results of the project for the benefit of 
                the public health community;
                    ``(F) establish mechanisms with other public or 
                private groups to maintain financial support for the 
                program after the grant terminates; and
                    ``(G) maintain relationships with local partners 
                and continue to develop new relationships with national 
                and State partners.
            ``(2) Duration.--The period during which payments may be 
        made under a grant under paragraph (1) shall not exceed 4 
        years. Such payments shall be subject to annual approval by the 
        Secretary and to the availability of appropriations for the 
        fiscal year involved.
    ``(f) Evaluation Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may award grants to 
        eligible entities that have received an implementation grant 
        under subsection (e) that require additional assistance for the 
        purpose of rigorous data analysis, program evaluation 
        (including process and outcome measures), or dissemination of 
        findings.
            ``(2) Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, 
        the Secretary shall give priority to--
                    ``(A) entities that in previous funding cycles--
                            ``(i) have received a planning grant under 
                        subsection (d); or
                            ``(ii) implemented activities of the type 
                        described in subsection (e)(1); and
                    ``(B) entities that incorporate best practices or 
                build on successful models in their action plan, 
                including the use of community health workers.
    ``(g) Sustainability.--The Secretary shall give priority to an 
eligible entity under this section if the entity agrees that, with 
respect to the costs to be incurred by the entity in carrying out the 
activities for which the grant was awarded, the entity (and each of the 
participating partners in the coalition represented by the entity) will 
maintain its expenditures of non-Federal funds for such activities at a 
level that is not less than the level of such expenditures during the 
fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal year for which the 
grant is awarded.
    ``(h) Nonduplication.--Funds provided through this grant program 
should supplement, not supplant, existing Federal funding, and the 
funds should not be used to duplicate the activities of the other 
health disparity grant programs in this Act.
    ``(i) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may, either directly or 
by grant or contract, provide any entity that receives a grant under 
this section with technical and other nonfinancial assistance necessary 
to meet the requirements of this section.
    ``(j) Dissemination.--The Secretary shall enable grantees to share 
best practices, evaluation results, and reports using the Internet, 
conferences, and other pertinent information regarding the projects 
funded by this section, including the outreach efforts of the Office of 
Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination.
    ``(k) Administrative Burdens.--The Secretary shall make every 
effort to minimize duplicative or unnecessary administrative burdens on 
grantees.

``SEC. 399S. GRANTS FOR HEALTH DISPARITY COLLABORATIVES.

    ``(a) Purpose.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of 
the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to 
eligible entities to assist in implementing systems of primary care 
practices through which to eliminate disparities in the delivery of 
healthcare and improve the healthcare provided to all patients.
    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a federally qualified health center as defined in 
        section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act with the 
        ability to establish and lead a collaborative partnership; and
            ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application, at such time, 
        in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require, which shall include plans to implement 
        collaboratives in one or more of the following areas:
                    ``(A) Diabetes.
                    ``(B) Asthma.
                    ``(C) Depression.
                    ``(D) Cardiovascular disease.
                    ``(E) Cancer.
                    ``(F) Preventive health, including screenings.
                    ``(G) Perinatal health.
                    ``(H) Patient safety.
                    ``(I) Other areas as designated by the Secretary.
    ``(c) Nonduplication.--Funds provided through this grant program 
should supplement, not supplant, existing Federal funding, and the 
funds should not be used to duplicate the activities of the other 
health disparity grant programs in this Act.
    ``(d) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may, either directly or 
by grant or contract, provide any entity that receives a grant under 
this section with technical and other nonfinancial assistance necessary 
to meet the requirements of this section.
    ``(e) Administrative Burdens.--The Secretary shall make every 
effort to minimize duplicative or unnecessary administrative burdens on 
grantees.

``SEC. 399T. COMMUNITY HEALTH INITIATIVES.

    ``(a) Purpose.--The Secretary shall establish the Community Health 
Initiative demonstration program to support comprehensive State, 
tribal, or local initiatives to improve the health of racial and ethnic 
minority and other health disparity populations.
    ``(b) Community Health Initiative Program.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award Community 
        Health Initiative Program grants to State and local public 
        health agencies of eligible communities. Each grant shall be 
        funded for 5 years.
            ``(2) Eligible communities.--
                    ``(A) Identification.--The Secretary shall develop, 
                after opportunity for public review and comment, and 
                implement a metric for identifying and notifying 
                eligible communities pursuant to subparagraph (B), and 
                report such findings to Congress and the public.
                    ``(B) Eligibility.--Eligible communities shall be 
                communities that are most at risk, or at greatest 
                disproportionate risk, for adverse health outcomes, as 
                measured by--
                            ``(i) overall burden of disease and health 
                        conditions;
                            ``(ii) accessibility to and availability of 
                        health and economic resources;
                            ``(iii) proportion of individuals from 
                        racial and ethnic minority and other health 
                        disparity populations; and
                            ``(iv) other factors as determined 
                        appropriate by the Secretary.
            ``(3) Agency collaboration.--The Secretary, in 
        collaboration with the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
        Health and Health Disparity Elimination, the Director of the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Administrator 
        of the Health Resources and Services Administration, the 
        Director of the Indian Health Service, and heads of other 
        Federal agencies as appropriate, shall determine, with respect 
        to the Community Health Initiative Program--
                    ``(A) core goals, objectives and reasonable 
                timelines for implementing, evaluating and sustaining 
                comprehensive and effective health and healthcare 
                improvement activities in eligible communities;
                    ``(B) current programmatic and research initiatives 
                in which eligible communities may participate;
                    ``(C) existing agency resources that can be 
                targeted to eligible communities; and
                    ``(D) mechanisms to facilitate joint application, 
                or establish a common application, to multiple grant 
                programs, as appropriate.
            ``(4) Applications.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The State and local public 
                health agencies of eligible communities shall jointly 
                submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in 
                such manner, and accompanied by such information as the 
                Secretary may require, including a strategic plan that 
                shall--
                            ``(i) describe the proposed activities 
                        pursuant to paragraph (5);
                            ``(ii) report the extent to which local 
                        institutions and organizations and community 
                        residents have participated in the strategic 
                        plan development;
                            ``(iii) identify established public-private 
                        partnerships, and State, local, and private 
                        resources that will be available;
                            ``(iv) identify Federal funding needed to 
                        support the proposed activities; and
                            ``(v) report the baselines, methods, and 
                        benchmarks for measuring the success of 
                        activities proposed in the strategic plan.
                    ``(B) Community advisory board.--
                            ``(i) In general.--In order to receive a 
                        Community Health Initiative Program grant under 
                        this section, an eligible community shall have 
                        a community advisory board.
                            ``(ii) Members.--
                                    ``(I) Community.--The majority of 
                                the members of a community advisory 
                                board under clause (i) shall be 
                                individuals that will benefit from the 
                                activities or services provided by the 
                                grants under this section.
                                    ``(II) Representatives.--A 
                                community advisory board shall include 
                                representatives from the State health 
                                department and county or local health 
                                department, community-based 
                                organizations, environmental and public 
                                health experts, healthcare 
                                professionals and providers, nonprofit 
                                leaders, community organizers, elected 
                                officials, private payers, employers, 
                                and consumers.
                            ``(iii) Duties.--A community advisory board 
                        shall--
                                    ``(I) oversee the functions and 
                                operations of Community Health 
                                Initiative Program grant activities;
                                    ``(II) assist in the evaluation of 
                                such activities; and
                                    ``(III) prepare an annual report 
                                that describes the progress made 
                                towards achieving stated goals and 
                                recommends future courses of action.
            ``(5) Use of funds.--An eligible community that receives a 
        grant under this section shall use the funding to support 
        activities to achieve stated core goals and objectives, 
        pursuant to paragraph (3), which may include initiatives that--
                    ``(A) promote disease prevention and health 
                promotion, particularly for racial and ethnic minority 
                and other health disparity populations;
                    ``(B) facilitate partnerships between healthcare 
                providers, public and health agencies, academic 
                institutions, community based or advocacy 
                organizations, elected officials, professional 
                societies, and other stakeholder groups;
                    ``(C) enhance the local capacity for aggregated and 
                disaggregated health data collection and reporting;
                    ``(D) coordinate and integrate community-based 
                activities including education, city planning, 
                transportation initiatives, environmental changes, and 
                other related activities at the local level that help 
                improve public health and address health concerns;
                    ``(E) mobilize financial and other resources from 
                the public and private sector to increase local 
                capacity to address health issues;
                    ``(F) support the training of staff in 
                communication and outreach to the general public, 
                particularly those at disproportionate risk for health 
                and healthcare disparities;
                    ``(G) assist eligible communities in meeting 
                Healthy People 2010 objectives; and
                    ``(H) aid eligible communities in providing 
                employment, and cultural and recreational resources 
                that enable healthy lifestyles.
            ``(6) Evaluation.--The Secretary, directly or through 
        contract, shall conduct and report an evaluation of the 
        Community Health Initiative Program that shall be available to 
        the public.
            ``(7) Supplement not supplant.--Grant funds received under 
        this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, 
        funding that would otherwise be used for activities described 
        under this section.

``SEC. 399U. OUTREACH.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the Office 
for Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination, the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services, and the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, shall establish a grant program to improve outreach, 
participation, and enrollment by eligible entities with respect to 
available healthcare programs.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--In this section, the term `eligible entity' 
means any of the following:
            ``(1) A State or local government.
            ``(2) A Federal health safety net organization.
            ``(3) A national, local, or community-based public or 
        nonprofit private organization.
            ``(4) A faith-based organization or consortia, to the 
        extent that a grant awarded to such an entity is consistent 
        with the requirements of section 1955 relating to a grant award 
        to nongovernmental entities.
            ``(5) An elementary or secondary school.
    ``(c) Definition.--In this section:
            ``(1) Federal health safety net organization.--The term 
        `Federal health safety net organization' means--
                    ``(A) an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or an 
                urban Indian organization receiving funds under title V 
                of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
                1651 et seq.), or an Indian Health Service provider;
                    ``(B) a Federally-qualified health center (as 
                defined in section 330);
                    ``(C) a hospital defined as a disproportionate 
                share hospital;
                    ``(D) a covered entity described in section 
                340B(a)(4); and
                    ``(E) any other entity or a consortium that serves 
                children under a federally funded program, including 
                the special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
                infants, and children (WIC) established under section 
                17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), 
                the head start and early head start programs under the 
                Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.), the school 
                lunch program established under the Richard B. Russell 
                National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), and 
                an elementary or secondary school.
            ``(2) Indians; indian tribe; tribal organization; urban 
        indian organization.--The terms `Indian', `Indian tribe', 
        `tribal organization', and `urban Indian organization' have the 
        meanings given such terms in section 4 of the Indian Health 
        Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603).
    ``(d) Priority for Award of Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--In making grants under subsection (a), 
        the Secretary shall give priority to--
                    ``(A) eligible entities that propose to target 
                geographic areas with high rates of--
                            ``(i) eligible but unenrolled children, 
                        including such children who reside in rural 
                        areas; or
                            ``(ii) racial and ethnic minorities and 
                        health disparity populations, including those 
                        proposals that address cultural and linguistic 
                        barriers to enrollment; and
                    ``(B) eligible entities that plan to engage in 
                outreach efforts with respect to individuals described 
                in subparagraph (A) and that are--
                            ``(i) Federal health safety net 
                        organizations; or
                            ``(ii) faith-based organizations or 
                        consortia.
            ``(2) Ten percent set aside for outreach to indian 
        children.--An amount equal to 10 percent of the funds 
        appropriated under section 202(3) of the Minority Health 
        Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act to carry out 
        this section for a fiscal year shall be used by the Secretary 
        to award grants to Indian Health Service providers and urban 
        Indian organizations receiving funds under title V of the 
        Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1651 et seq.) for 
        outreach to, and enrollment of, children who are Indians.''.

SEC. 202. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    There are authorized to be appropriated--
            (1) such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
        2007 through 2011, to carry out section 399Q of the Public 
        Health Service Act (as added by section 201);
            (2) $52,000,000 for fiscal year 2007, and such sums as may 
        be necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011, to 
        carry out section 399R of the Public Health Service Act (as 
        added by section 201); and
            (3) such sums as necessary for each of fiscal years 2007 
        through 2011, to carry out sections 399S, 399T, and 399U of the 
        Public Health Service Act (as added by section 201).

                          TITLE III--RESEARCH

SEC. 301. AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY.

    Part B of title IX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299b 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 918. ENHANCED RESEARCH WITH RESPECT TO HEALTHCARE DISPARITIES.

    ``(a) Accelerating the Elimination of Disparities.--
            ``(1) Strategic plan.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director, and in collaboration with the Deputy Assistant 
        Secretary for Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination, 
        shall develop a strategic plan regarding research supported by 
        the agency to improve healthcare and eliminate healthcare 
        disparities among racial and ethnic minority and other health 
        disparity populations. In developing such plan, the Secretary 
        shall--
                    ``(A) determine which areas of research focus would 
                have the greatest impact on healthcare improvement and 
                elimination of disparities, taking into consideration 
                the overall health status of various populations, 
                disproportionate burden of diseases or health 
                conditions, and types of interventions for which data 
                on effectiveness is limited;
                    ``(B) establish measurable goals and objectives 
                which will allow assessment of progress;
                    ``(C) solicit public review and comment from 
                experts in healthcare, minority health and health 
                disparities, health services research, and other areas 
                as determined appropriate by the Secretary;
                    ``(D) incorporate recommendations from the 
                Institute of Medicine, pursuant to section 303 of the 
                Minority Health Improvement and Health Disparity 
                Elimination Act, as appropriate;
                    ``(E) complete such plan within 12 months of 
                enactment of the Minority Health Improvement and Health 
                Disparity Elimination Act, and update such plan and 
                report on progress meeting established goals and 
                objectives not less than every 2 years;
                    ``(F) include progress meeting plan goals and 
                objectives in annual performance budget submissions;
                    ``(G) ensure coordination and integration with the 
                National Plan to Improve Minority Health and Eliminate 
                Health Disparities, as described in section 1707(c) and 
                other Department-wide initiatives, as feasible; and
                    ``(H) report the plan to the Congress and make 
                available to the public in print and electronic format.
            ``(2) Establishment of grants.--The Secretary, acting 
        through the Director, and in collaboration with the Deputy 
        Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and Health Disparity 
        Elimination, may award grants or contracts to eligible entities 
        for research to improve the health of racial and ethnic 
        minority and other health disparity populations (as defined in 
        section 903(d)).
            ``(3) Application; eligible entities.--
                    ``(A) Application.--To receive a grant or contract 
                under this section, an eligible entity shall submit to 
                the Secretary an application at such time, in such 
                manner, and containing such information as the 
                Secretary may require.
                    ``(B) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to receive 
                a grant or contract under this section, an entity shall 
                be a health center, hospital, health plan, health 
                system, community clinic, or other health entity 
                determined appropriate by the Secretary, that--
                            ``(i) by legal mandate or explicitly 
                        adopted mission, provides patients with access 
                        to services regardless of their ability to pay;
                            ``(ii) provides care or treatment for a 
                        substantial number of patients who are 
                        uninsured, are receiving assistance under a 
                        State program under title XIX of the Social 
                        Security Act, or are members of vulnerable 
                        populations, as determined by the Secretary;
                            ``(iii) serves a disproportionate 
                        percentage of patients from racial and ethnic 
                        minority and other health disparity 
                        populations;
                            ``(iv) provides an assurance that amounts 
                        received under the grant or contract will be 
                        used to implement strategies that address 
                        patients' linguistic needs, where necessary, 
                        and recruit and maintain diverse staff and 
                        leadership; and
                            ``(v) provides an assurance that amounts 
                        received under the grant or contract will be 
                        used to support quality improvement activities 
                        for patients from racial and ethnic minority 
                        and other health disparity populations.
                    ``(C) Preference.--Consortia of 3 or more eligible 
                entities shall be given a preference for grant or 
                contract funding.
            ``(4) Research.--The research funded under paragraph (2), 
        with respect to racial and ethnic minority and other health 
        disparity populations, shall--
                    ``(A) prioritize the translation of existing 
                research into practical interventions for improving 
                health and healthcare and reducing disparities;
                    ``(B) target areas of need as identified in the 
                strategic plan pursuant to subsection (a)(1), the 
                National Healthcare Disparities Report published by the 
                Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, relevant 
                reports by the Institute of Medicine, and other reports 
                issued by Federal health agencies;
                    ``(C) include a focus on community-based solutions 
                and partnerships as appropriate;
                    ``(D) expand practice-based research networks 
                (primary care and larger delivery systems) to include 
                networks of delivery sites serving large numbers of 
                minority and health disparity populations including--
                            ``(i) public hospitals and private non-
                        profit hospitals;
                            ``(ii) health centers;
                            ``(iii) health plans; and
                            ``(iv) other sites as determined 
                        appropriate by the Director.
            ``(5) Dissemination of research findings.--To ensure that 
        findings from the research described in paragraph (4) are 
        disseminated and applied promptly, the Director shall--
                    ``(A) develop outreach and training programs for 
                healthcare providers with respect to the practical and 
                effective interventions that result from research 
                programs carried out with grants or contracts awarded 
                under this section; and
                    ``(B) provide technical assistance for the 
                implementation of evidence-based practices that will 
                improve health and healthcare and reduce disparities.
    ``(b) Realizing the Potential of Disease Management.--
            ``(1) Public-private sector partnership to assess 
        effectiveness of existing disease management strategies.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
                public-private partnership to identify, evaluate, and 
                disseminate effective disease management strategies, 
                tailored to improve healthcare and health outcomes for 
                patients from racial and ethnic minority and other 
                health disparity populations. Such strategies shall 
                reflect established healthcare quality standards and 
                benchmarks and other evidence-based recommendations.
                    ``(B) Partnership composition.--The partnership's 
                members shall include the following:
                            ``(i) Representatives from the following:
                                    ``(I) The Office of Minority Health 
                                and Health Disparity Elimination.
                                    ``(II) The Centers for Disease 
                                Control and Prevention.
                                    ``(III) The Agency for Healthcare 
                                Research and Quality.
                                    ``(IV) The Centers for Medicare and 
                                Medicaid Services.
                                    ``(V) The Health Resources and 
                                Services Administration.
                                    ``(VI) The Indian Health Service.
                                    ``(VII) Other agencies as 
                                designated by the Secretary.
                            ``(ii) Representatives of health plans, 
                        employers, or other private entities that have 
                        implemented disease management programs.
                            ``(iii) Representatives of hospitals, 
                        community health centers, large, small, or solo 
                        provider groups, or other organizations that 
                        provide healthcare and have implemented disease 
                        management programs.
                            ``(iv) Community-based representatives who 
                        have been involved with establishing, 
                        implementing, or evaluating disease management 
                        programs.
                            ``(v) Other individuals as designated by 
                        the Secretary.
                    ``(C) Partnership duties.--
                            ``(i) In general.--Not later than 18 months 
                        after the date of enactment of the Minority 
                        Health Improvement and Health Disparity 
                        Elimination Act, the partnership shall release 
                        a best practices report, with a particular 
                        focus on the following:
                                    ``(I) Self-management training.
                                    ``(II) Increasing patient 
                                participation in and satisfaction with 
                                healthcare encounters.
                                    ``(III) Helping patients use 
                                quality performance and cost 
                                information to choose appropriate 
                                healthcare providers for their care.
                                    ``(IV) Interventions outside of a 
                                traditional healthcare environment, 
                                including the workplace, school, 
                                community, or home.
                                    ``(V) Interventions utilizing 
                                community health workers and case 
                                managers.
                                    ``(VI) Interventions that implement 
                                integrated disease management and 
                                treatment strategies to address 
                                multiple chronic co-occurring 
                                conditions.
                                    ``(VII) Other interventions as 
                                identified by the Secretary.
            ``(2) Report.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Not later than September 30, 
                2010, the partnership shall submit to the Secretary and 
                the relevant committees of Congress a report that 
                describes the extent to which the activities and 
                research funded under this section have been successful 
                in reducing and eliminating disparities in health and 
                healthcare in targeted populations.
                    ``(B) Availability.--The Secretary shall ensure 
                that the report is made available on the Internet 
                websites of the Office of Minority Health and Health 
                Disparity Elimination, the Agency for Healthcare 
                Research and Quality, and other agencies as 
                appropriate.''.

SEC. 302. GENETIC VARIATION AND HEALTH.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall ensure that any current, 
proposed, or future research and programmatic activities regarding 
genomics include focus on genetic variation within and between 
populations, with a focus on racial and ethnic minority populations, 
that may affect risk of disease or response to drug therapy and other 
treatments, in order to ensure that all populations are able to derive 
full benefit from genomic tests and treatments that may improve their 
health and healthcare. The Secretary shall encourage, with respect to 
racial and ethnic minority populations, efforts to--
            (1) increase access, availability, and utilization of 
        genomic tests and treatments;
            (2) determine and monitor appropriateness of use of genomic 
        tests and treatments;
            (3) increase awareness of the importance of knowing one's 
        family history and the relationships between genes, the social 
        and physical environment, and health; and
            (4) expand genomics research that would help to--
                    (A) improve tests to facilitate earlier and more 
                accurate diagnoses;
                    (B) enhance the safety of drugs, particularly for 
                drugs that pose an elevated risk for adverse drug 
                events in such populations;
                    (C) increase the effectiveness of drugs, 
                particularly for diseases and conditions that 
                disproportionately affect such populations; and
                    (D) augment the current understanding of the 
                interactions between genomic, social and physical 
                environmental factors and their influence on the 
                causality, prevention, and treatment of diseases common 
                in such populations.
    (b) Genetic Variation, Environment, and Health Summit.--
            (1) Summit.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Human 
        Genome Research Institute, in collaboration with the Director 
        of the Office of Genomics and Disease Prevention at the Centers 
        for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the Office 
        of Behavioral and Social Science Research at the National 
        Institutes of Health, and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the 
        Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination, 
        shall convene a Summit for the purpose of providing leadership 
        and guidance to Secretary, Congress, and other public and 
        private entities on current and future areas of focus for 
        genomics research, including translation of findings from such 
        research, relating to improving the health of racial and ethnic 
        minority populations and reducing health disparities.
            (2) Participation.--The Summit shall include--
                    (A) representatives from the Federal health 
                agencies, including the National Institutes of Health, 
                the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
                Food and Drug Administration, the Health Resources and 
                Services Administration, and additional agencies and 
                departments as determined appropriate by the Secretary;
                    (B) independent experts and stakeholders from 
                relevant industry and academic institutions, 
                particularly those that have demonstrated expertise in 
                both genomics and minority health and serve a 
                disproportionate number of racial and ethnic minority 
                patients; and
                    (C) leaders of community organizations that work to 
                reduce and eliminate health disparities.
            (3) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the conclusion of 
        the Summit, the Director of the National Human Genome Research 
        Institute shall submit to Congress and make available to the 
        public a report detailing recommendations on--
                    (A) an appropriate description of human diversity, 
                incorporating available information on genetics, for 
                use in genomic research and programs operated or 
                supported by the Federal Government;
                    (B) guiding ethics, principles, and protocols for 
                the inclusion and designation of racial and ethnic 
                minority populations in genomics research, particularly 
                clinical trials programs operated or supported by the 
                Federal Government;
                    (C) ways to increase access to and utilization of 
                effective pharmacogenomic and other genetic screening 
                and services for racial and ethnic minority 
                populations;
                    (D) research opportunities and funding support in 
                the area of genomic variation that may improve the 
                health and healthcare of minority populations;
                    (E) ways to enhance integration of Federal 
                Government-wide efforts and activities pertaining to 
                race, genomics, and health; and
                    (F) need for additional privacy protections in 
                preventing stigmatization and inappropriate use of 
                genetic information.
    (c) Pharmacogenomics and Emerging Issues Advisory Committee.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary, under section 222 of the 
        Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 217a), shall convene and 
        consult an advisory committee on issues relating to 
        pharmacogenomics (referred to in this subsection as the 
        ``Advisory Committee'').
            (2) Duties.--
                    (A) In general.--The Advisory Committee shall 
                advise and make recommendations to the Secretary, 
                through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs and in 
                consultation with the Director of the National 
                Institutes of Health, on the evolving science of 
                pharmacogenomics and interindividual variability in 
                drug response, as it relates to the health of racial 
                and ethnic minorities.
                    (B) Matters considered.--The recommendations under 
                subparagraph (A) shall include recommendations on--
                            (i) the ethics, design, and analysis of 
                        clinical trials involving racial and ethnic 
                        minorities conducted under section 351, 409I, 
                        or 499 of the Public Health Service Act or 
                        section 505(i), 505A, 505B, or 515(g) of the 
                        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act;
                            (ii) general policy and guidance with 
                        respect to the development, approval or 
                        clearance, and labeling of medical products for 
                        racial and ethnic minorities;
                            (iii) the role of pharmacogenomics during 
                        the development of drugs, biological products, 
                        and diagnostics;
                            (iv) the understanding of interindividual 
                        variability in drug response;
                            (v) diagnostics or treatments for diseases 
                        or conditions common in racial and ethnic 
                        minorities; and
                            (vi) the identification of other areas of 
                        unmet medical need.
            (3) Composition.--The Advisory Committee shall include--
                    (A) experts in the fields of--
                            (i) minority health and health disparities;
                            (ii) genomics;
                            (iii) pharmaceutical and diagnostic 
                        research and development;
                            (iv) ethical, legal, and social issues 
                        relating to clinical trials; and
                            (v) bioinformatics and information 
                        technology;
                    (B) representatives from minority health 
                organizations and relevant patient organizations; and
                    (C) other experts as deemed appropriate by the 
                Secretary.
            (4) Coordination with other advisory committees.--The 
        Advisory Committee may consult and coordinate with other 
        advisory committees of the Department of Health and Human 
        Services as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
            (5) Recommendations.--The Advisory Committee shall submit 
        recommendations to the Secretary with respect to each of the 
        matters described under paragraph (2)(B) prior to the 
        development by the Secretary of the report described under 
        paragraph (6).
            (6) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary--
                    (A) shall, acting through the Commissioner of Food 
                and Drugs and in consultation with the Director of the 
                National Institutes of Health, and taking into 
                consideration the recommendations of the Advisory 
                Committee submitted under paragraph (5), submit to the 
                Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of 
                the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
                the House of Representatives, a report on the evolving 
                science of pharmacogenomics as it relates to racial and 
                ethnic minorities, including a review of the guidance 
                of the Food and Drug Administration on the 
                participation of racial and ethnic minorities in 
                clinical trials; and
                    (B) shall ensure that such report is made publicly 
                available.

SEC. 303. EVALUATIONS BY THE INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE.

    (a) Health Disparities Summit.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Institute of Medicine shall convene 
        a summit on health disparities (referred to this section as the 
        ``Summit'').
            (2) Purpose.--The purposes of the Summit include--
                    (A) reviewing current activities of the Federal 
                Government in addressing health and healthcare 
                disparities as experienced by racial and ethnic 
                minority populations, and other health disparity 
                populations as practicable; and
                    (B) assessing progress made since the 2002 
                Institute of Medicine National Healthcare Disparities 
                Report.
            (3) Areas of focus.--The Summit shall examine the 
        activities of the Federal Government to reduce and eliminate 
        health disparities, with a focus on--
                    (A) education and training, including health 
                professions programs that increase minority 
                representation in medicine and the health professions;
                    (B) data collection and analysis;
                    (C) coordination among agencies and departments in 
                addressing healthcare disparities;
                    (D) research into the causes of and strategies to 
                eliminate health disparities; and
                    (E) programs that increase access to care and 
                improve health outcomes for health disparity 
                populations.
            (4) Participation.--Summit participants shall include--
                    (A) representatives of the Federal Government;
                    (B) experts with research experience in identifying 
                and addressing healthcare disparities among racial and 
                ethnic minority and other health disparity populations; 
                and
                    (C) representatives from community-based 
                organizations and nonprofit groups that address the 
                issues of racial and ethnic minority and other health 
                disparity populations.
            (5) Summit proceedings.--Not later than 180 days after the 
        conclusion of the Summit, the Secretary shall offer to enter 
        into a contract with the Institute of Medicine to publish a 
        report summarizing the discussions of the Summit and review of 
        current Federal activities to address healthcare disparities 
        for racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
        populations.
    (b) National Plan To Eliminate Disparities.--
            (1) Plan.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Institute of Medicine shall develop 
        an evidence-based, strategic, national plan to eliminate 
        disparities which shall--
                    (A) include goals, interventions, and resources 
                needed to eliminate disparities;
                    (B) establish a reasonable timetable to reach 
                selected priorities;
                    (C) inform and complement the National Plan to 
                Improve Minority Health and Eliminate Health 
                Disparities, pursuant to section 1707(c)(2) of the 
                Public Health Service Act (as added by section 501 of 
                this Act); and
                    (D) inform the development of criteria for 
                evaluation of the effectiveness of programs authorized 
                under this Act (and the amendments made by this Act), 
                pursuant to subsection (c).
            (2) Report.--The Secretary shall offer to enter into a 
        contract with the Institute of Medicine to publish the National 
        Plan to Eliminate Disparities.
    (c) Institute of Medicine Evaluation.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall offer to enter into 
        a contract with the Institute of Medicine to evaluate the 
        effectiveness of the programs authorized under this Act (and 
        the amendments made by this Act) in addressing and reducing 
        health disparities experienced by racial and ethnic minority 
        and other health disparity populations. In making such an 
        evaluation, the Institute of Medicine shall consult--
                    (A) representatives of the Federal Government;
                    (B) experts with research and policy experience in 
                identifying and addressing healthcare disparities among 
                racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                populations; and
                    (C) representatives from community-based 
                organizations and nonprofit groups that address health 
                disparity issues.
            (2) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the Secretary 
        enters into the contract under paragraph (1), the Institute of 
        Medicine shall submit to the Secretary and relevant committees 
        of Congress a report that contains the results of the 
        evaluation described under such subparagraph, and any 
        recommendations of such Institute.
            (3) Response.--Not later than 180 days after the date the 
        Institute of Medicine submits the report under this subsection, 
        the Secretary shall publish a response to such recommendations, 
        which shall be provided to the relevant committees of Congress 
        and made publicly available through the Internet Clearinghouse 
        under section 270 of the Public Health Service Act (as added by 
        section 101).
    (d) Health Information Technology.--
            (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the National Library of Medicine, shall offer to 
        enter into a contract with the Institute of Medicine to study 
        and make recommendations regarding the use of health 
        information technology and bioinformatics to improve the health 
        and healthcare of racial and ethnic minority and other health 
        disparity populations.
            (2) Study.--The study under paragraph (1), with respect to 
        increasing access and quality of healthcare for racial and 
        ethnic minority and other health disparity populations, shall 
        assess and make recommendations regarding--
                    (A) effective applications of health information 
                technology, including telemedicine and telepsychiatry;
                    (B) status of development of health information 
                technology standards that will permit healthcare 
                information of the type required to support patient 
                care;
                    (C) inclusion of organizations with expertise in 
                minority health and health disparities in the 
                development of health information technology standards 
                and applications;
                    (D) priority areas for research to improve the 
                dissemination, management, and use of biomedical 
                knowledge that address identified and unmet needs;
                    (E) educational and training needs and 
                opportunities to assist health professionals understand 
                and apply health information technology; and
                    (F) ways to increase recruitment and retention of 
                racial and ethnic minorities into the field of medical 
                informatics.
            (3) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the Secretary 
        enters into the contract under paragraph (1), the Institute of 
        Medicine shall submit to the Secretary and relevant committees 
        of Congress a report that contains the findings and 
        recommendations of this study.

SEC. 304. NATIONAL CENTER FOR MINORITY HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES 
              REAUTHORIZATION.

    Section 485E of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 287c-31) 
is amended--
            (1) by striking subsection (e) and inserting the following:
    ``(e) Duties of the Director.--
            ``(1) Interagency coordination of minority health and 
        health disparities activities.--With respect to minority health 
        and health disparities, the Director of the Center shall plan, 
        coordinate, and evaluate research and other activities 
        conducted or supported by the agencies of the National 
        Institutes of Health. In carrying out the preceding sentence, 
        the Director of the Center shall evaluate the minority health 
        and health disparity activities of each of such agencies and 
        shall provide for the periodic reevaluation of such activities.
            ``(2) Consultations.--The Director of the Center shall 
        carry out this subpart (including developing and revising the 
        plan and budget required in subsection (f)) in consultation 
        with the Directors of the agencies (or a designee of the 
        Directors) of the National Institutes of Health, with the 
        advisory councils of the agencies, and with the advisory 
        council established under section (j).
            ``(3) Coordination of activities.--The Director of the 
        Center shall act as the primary Federal official with 
        responsibility for coordinating all minority health disparities 
        research and other health disparities research conducted or 
        supported by the National Institutes of Health and shall--
                    ``(A) represent the health disparities research 
                program of the National Institutes of Health including 
                the minority health disparities research program at all 
                relevant executive branch task forces, committees, and 
                planning activities;
                    ``(B) maintain communications with all relevant 
                Public Health Service agencies, including the Indian 
                Health Service and various other departments of the 
                Federal Government, to ensure the timely transmission 
                of information concerning advances in minority health 
                disparities research and other health disparities 
                research between these various agencies for 
                dissemination to affected communities and healthcare 
                providers; and
                    ``(C) engage with community-based organizations and 
                health provider groups to--
                            ``(i) increase education and awareness 
                        about the Center's activities and areas of 
                        research focus; and
                            ``(ii) accelerate the translation of 
                        research findings into programs including those 
                        carried out by community-based 
                        organizations.'';
            (2) in subsection (f)--
                    (A) by striking the subsection heading and 
                inserting the following:
    ``(f) Comprehensive Plan for Research; Budget Estimate; Allocation 
of Appropriations.--'';
                    (B) in paragraph (1)--
                            (i) by striking the matter preceding 
                        subparagraph (A) and subparagraph (A) and 
                        inserting the following:
            ``(1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this 
        section and other applicable law, the Director of the Center, 
        in consultation with the Director of NIH, the Directors of the 
        other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, and the 
        advisory council established under subsection (j) shall--
                    ``(A) annually review and revise a comprehensive 
                plan (referred to in this section as `the Plan') and 
                budget for the conduct and support of all minority 
                health and health disparities research and other health 
                disparities research activities of the agencies of the 
                National Institutes of Health;'';
                            (ii) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``, 
                        with respect to amounts appropriated for 
                        activities of the Center,'';
                            (iii) by striking subparagraph (F) and 
                        inserting the following:
                    ``(F) ensure that the Plan and budget are presented 
                to and considered by the Director during the 
                formulation of the overall annual budget for the 
                National Institutes of Health;'';
                            (iv) by redesignating subparagraphs (G) and 
                        (H) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), respectively; 
                        and
                            (v) by inserting after subparagraph (F), 
                        the following:
                    ``(G) annually submit to Congress a report on the 
                progress made with respect to the Plan;
                    ``(H) creating and implementing a plan for the 
                systematic review of research activities supported by 
                the National Institutes of Health that are within the 
                mission of both the Center and other agencies of the 
                National Institutes of Health, by establishing 
                mechanisms for--
                            ``(i) tracking minority health and health 
                        disparity research conducted within the 
                        agencies;
                            ``(ii) the early identification of 
                        applications and proposals for grants, 
                        contracts, and cooperative agreements 
                        supporting extramural training, research, and 
                        development, that are submitted to the agencies 
                        and that are within the mission of the Center;
                            ``(iii) providing the Center with the 
                        written descriptions and scientific peer review 
                        results of such applications and proposals;
                            ``(iv) enabling the agencies to consult 
                        with the Director of the Center prior to final 
                        approval of such applications and proposals; 
                        and
                            ``(v) reporting to the Director of the 
                        Center all such applications and proposals that 
                        are approved for funding by the agencies;''; 
                        and
                    (C) in paragraph (2)--
                            (i) in subparagraph (D), by striking 
                        ``and'' at the end;
                            (ii) in subparagraph (E), by striking the 
                        period and inserting ``; and''; and
                            (iii) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(F) the number and type of personnel needs of the 
                Center.'';
            (3) in subsection (h)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``endowments at 
                centers of excellence under section 736.'' and 
                inserting the following: ``endowments at--
                    ``(A) centers of excellence under section 736; and
                    ``(B) centers of excellence under section 485F.''; 
                and
                    (B) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``average'' 
                and inserting ``median'';
            (4) by redesignating subsections (k) and (l) as subsections 
        (m) and (n), respectively;
            (5) by inserting after subsection (j), the following:
    ``(k) Representation of Minorities Among Researchers.--The 
Secretary, in collaboration with the Director of the Center, shall 
determine the extent to which racial and ethnic minority and other 
health disparity populations are represented among senior physicians 
and scientists of the national research institutes and among physicians 
and scientists conducting research with funds provided by such 
institutes, and as appropriate, carry out activities to increase the 
extent of such representation.
    ``(l) Cancer Research.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
Director of the Center, shall designate and support a cancer 
prevention, control, and population science center to address the 
significantly elevated rate of morbidity and mortality from cancer in 
racial and ethnic minority populations. Such designated center shall be 
housed within an existing, stand-alone cancer center at a historically 
black college and university that has a demonstrable commitment to and 
expertise in cancer research in the basic, clinical, and population 
sciences.'';
            (6) in subsection (l)(1) (as so redesignated), by inserting 
        before the semicolon the following: ``, with a particular focus 
        on evaluation of progress made toward fulfillment of the goals 
        of the Plan''; and
            (7) by striking subsection (m) (as so redesignated).

SEC. 305. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    (a) Sections 301, 302, and 303.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 
2007 through 2011, to carry out sections 301, 302, and 303 (and the 
amendments made by such sections).
    (b) Section 304.--
            (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
        $240,000,000 for fiscal year 2007, such sums as may be 
        necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011, to carry 
        out section 304.
            (2) Allocation of funds.--Subject to section 485E of the 
        Public Health Service Act (as amended by section 304) and other 
        applicable law, the Director of the Center under such section 
        485E shall direct all amounts appropriated for activities under 
        such section and in collaboration with the Director of National 
        Institutes of Health and the directors of other institutes and 
        centers of the National Institutes of Health.
            (3) Management of allocations.--All amounts allocated or 
        expended for minority health and health disparities research 
        activities under this subsection shall be reported 
        programmatically to and approved by the Director of the Center 
        under such section 485E, in accordance with the Plan described 
        under such section 485E.

            TITLE IV--DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY

SEC. 401. DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY.

    The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:

          ``TITLE XXIX--DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY

``SEC. 2901. DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND QUALITY.

    ``(a) Data Collection and Reporting.--The Secretary shall ensure 
that not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of the Minority 
Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act any ongoing or 
new federally conducted or supported health programs (including 
surveys) result in the--
            ``(1) collection and reporting of data by race and 
        ethnicity using, at a minimum, Office of Budget and Management 
        standards in effect on the date of enactment of the Minority 
        Health Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act;
            ``(2) collection and reporting of data by geographic 
        location, socioeconomic position (such as employment, income, 
        and education), primary language, and, when determined 
        practicable by the Secretary, health literacy; and
            ``(3) if practicable, collection and reporting of data on 
        additional population groups if such data can be aggregated 
        into the minimum race and ethnicity data categories.
    ``(b) Data Analysis and Dissemination.--
            ``(1) Data analysis.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall analyze data 
                collected under subsection (a) to detect and monitor 
                trends in disparities in health and healthcare for 
                racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                populations, and examine the interaction between 
                various disparity indicators.
                    ``(B) Quality analysis.--The Secretary shall ensure 
                that the analyses under subparagraph (A) incorporate 
                data reported according to quality measurement systems.
            ``(2) Quality measures.--When the Secretary, by statutory 
        or regulatory authority, adopts and implements any quality 
        measures or any quality measurement system, the Secretary shall 
        ensure the quality measures or quality measurement system 
        comply with the following:
                    ``(A) Measures.--Measures selected shall, to the 
                extent practicable--
                            ``(i) assess the effectiveness, timeliness, 
                        patient self-management, patient centeredness, 
                        equity, and efficiency of care received by 
                        patients, including patients from racial and 
                        ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                        populations;
                            ``(ii) are evidence based, reliable, and 
                        valid; and
                            ``(iii) include measures of clinical 
                        processes and outcomes, patient experience and 
                        efficiency.
                    ``(B) Consultation.--In selecting quality measures 
                or a quality measurement system or systems for adoption 
                and implementation, the Secretary shall consult with--
                            ``(i) individuals from racial and ethnic 
                        minority and other health disparity 
                        populations; and
                            ``(ii) experts in the identification and 
                        elimination of disparities in health and 
                        healthcare among racial and ethnic minority and 
                        other health disparity populations.
            ``(3) Dissemination.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make the 
                measures, data, and analyses described in paragraph (1) 
                and (2) available to--
                            ``(i) the Office of Minority Health and 
                        Health Disparity Elimination;
                            ``(ii) the National Center on Minority 
                        Health and Health Disparities;
                            ``(iii) the Agency for Healthcare Research 
                        and Quality for inclusion in the Agency's 
                        reports;
                            ``(iv) the Centers for Disease Control and 
                        Prevention;
                            ``(v) the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
                        Services;
                            ``(vi) the Indian Health Service;
                            ``(vii) other agencies within the 
                        Department of Health and Human Services; and
                            ``(viii) other entities as determined 
                        appropriate by the Secretary.
                    ``(B) Additional research.--The Secretary may, as 
                the Secretary determines appropriate, make the 
                measures, data, and analysis described in paragraphs 
                (1) and (2) available for additional research, 
                analysis, and dissemination to nongovernmental entities 
                and the public.
    ``(c) Research.--
            ``(1) Disparity indicators.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants 
                or contracts for research to develop appropriate 
                methods, indicators, and measures that will enable the 
                detection and assessment of disparities in healthcare. 
                Such research shall prioritize research with respect to 
                the following:
                            ``(i) Race and ethnicity.
                            ``(ii) Geographic location (such as 
                        geocoding).
                            ``(iii) Socioeconomic position (such as 
                        income or education level).
                            ``(iv) Health literacy.
                            ``(v) Cultural competency.
                            ``(vi) Additional measures as determined 
                        appropriate by the Secretary.
                    ``(B) Applied research.--The Secretary shall use 
                the results of the research from grants awarded under 
                subparagraph (A) to improve the data collection 
                described under subsection (a).
            ``(2) Strategic partnerships to encourage and improve data 
        collection.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may award not more 
                than 20 grants to eligible entities for the purposes 
                of--
                            ``(i) enhancing and improving methods for 
                        the collection, reporting, analysis, and 
                        dissemination of data, as required under the 
                        Minority Health Improvement and Health 
                        Disparity Elimination Act; and
                            ``(ii) encouraging the collection, 
                        reporting, analysis, and dissemination of data 
                        to identify and address disparities in health 
                        and healthcare.
                    ``(B) Definition of eligible entity.--In this 
                paragraph, the term `eligible entity' means a health 
                plan, federally qualified health center, hospital, 
                rural health clinic, academic institution, policy 
                research organization, or other entity, including an 
                Indian Health Service hospital or clinic, Indian tribal 
                health facility, or urban Indian facility, that the 
                Secretary determines to be appropriate.
                    ``(C) Application.--An eligible entity desiring a 
                grant under this paragraph shall submit an application 
                to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
                containing such information as the Secretary may 
                require.
                    ``(D) Priority in awarding grants.--In awarding 
                grants under this paragraph, the Secretary shall give 
                priority to eligible entities that represent 
                collaboratives with--
                            ``(i) hospitals, health plans, or health 
                        centers; and
                            ``(ii) at least 1 community-based 
                        organization or patient advocacy group.
                    ``(E) Use of funds.--An eligible entity that 
                receives a grant under this paragraph shall use grant 
                funds to--
                            ``(i) collect, analyze, or report data by 
                        race, ethnicity, geographic location, 
                        socioeconomic position, health literacy, or 
                        other health disparity indicator;
                            ``(ii) conduct and report analyses of 
                        quality of healthcare and disparities in health 
                        and healthcare for racial and ethnic minority 
                        and other health disparity populations, 
                        including disparities in diagnosis, management 
                        and treatment, and health outcomes for acute 
                        and chronic disease;
                            ``(iii) improve health data collection, 
                        analysis, and reporting for subpopulations and 
                        categories;
                            ``(iv) modify, implement, and evaluate use 
                        of health information technology systems that 
                        facilitate data collection, analysis and 
                        reporting for racial and ethnic minority and 
                        other health disparity populations, and support 
                        healthcare interventions;
                            ``(v) develop educational programs to 
                        inform patients, providers, purchasers, and 
                        other individuals served about the legality and 
                        importance of the collection, analysis, and 
                        reporting of data by race, ethnicity, 
                        socioeconomic position, geographic location, 
                        and health literacy, for eliminating 
                        disparities in health; and
                            ``(vi) evaluate the activities conducted 
                        under this paragraph.
    ``(d) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical 
assistance to promote compliance with the data collection and reporting 
requirements of the Minority Health Improvement and Health Disparity 
Elimination Act.
    ``(e) Privacy and Security.--The Secretary shall ensure all 
appropriate privacy and security protections for health data collected, 
reported, analyzed, and disseminated pursuant to the Minority Health 
Improvement and Health Disparity Elimination Act.
    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011.''.

      TITLE V--LEADERSHIP, COLLABORATION, AND NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

SEC. 501. OFFICE OF MINORITY HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITY ELIMINATION.

    (a) In General.--Section 1707 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 300u-6) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 1707. OFFICE OF MINORITY HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITY 
              ELIMINATION.

    ``(a) Establishment.--For the purpose of improving the health of 
racial and ethnic minority populations and other health disparity 
populations, as described in subsection (b), there is established an 
Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination within the 
Office of Public Health and Science. There shall be in the Department 
of Health and Human Services a Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority 
Health and Health Disparity Elimination, who shall be the head of the 
Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination. The 
Secretary, acting through such Deputy Assistant Secretary, shall carry 
out this section.
    ``(b) Populations To Be Served.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
services provided under this section are prioritized to improve the 
health of racial and ethnic minority groups. To the extent that 
services are provided to other health disparity populations, such 
populations, as compared to the general population, must experience a--
            ``(1) disproportionate burden of disease, particularly 
        chronic conditions such as hepatitis B, diabetes, heart 
        disease, stroke, high blood pressure, mental illness, asthma, 
        obesity, HIV/AIDS, and cancer;
            ``(2) significantly elevated risk for poor health outcomes, 
        including disability and premature mortality;
            ``(3) disproportionate lack of access to local health 
        resources, including hospitals, clinics, and health 
        professionals; and
            ``(4) lower socioeconomic position.
    ``(c) Duties.--With respect to racial and ethnic minority groups, 
and other health disparity groups, the Secretary, acting through the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary, shall carry out the following:
            ``(1) Coordinate and provide input on activities within the 
        Public Health Service that relate to disease prevention, health 
        promotion, health service delivery, health workforce, and 
        research concerning racial and ethnic minority populations, and 
        other health disparity populations. The Secretary shall ensure 
        that the heads of each of the agencies of the Service 
        collaborate with the Deputy Assistant Secretary on the 
        development and conduct of such activities.
            ``(2) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
        the Minority Health Improvement and Health Disparity 
        Elimination Act, develop and implement a comprehensive 
        Department-wide plan to improve minority health and eliminate 
        health disparities in the United States, to be known as the 
        National Plan to Improve Minority Health and Eliminate Health 
        Disparities, (referred to in this section as the `National 
        Plan'). With respect to development and implementation of the 
        National Plan, the Secretary shall carry out the following:
                    ``(A) Consult with the following:
                            ``(i) The Director of the Centers for 
                        Disease Control and Prevention.
                            ``(ii) The Director of the National 
                        Institutes of Health.
                            ``(iii) The Director of the National Center 
                        on Minority Health and Health Disparities of 
                        the National Institutes of Health.
                            ``(iv) The Director of the Agency for 
                        Healthcare Research and Quality.
                            ``(v) The National Coordinator for Health 
                        Information Technology.
                            ``(vi) The Administrator of the Health 
                        Resources and Services Administration.
                            ``(vii) The Administrator of the Centers 
                        for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
                            ``(viii) The Director of the Office for 
                        Civil Rights.
                            ``(ix) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
                            ``(x) The Administrator of the Substance 
                        Abuse and Mental Health Services 
                        Administration.
                            ``(xi) The Secretary of Defense.
                            ``(xii) The Commissioner of the Food and 
                        Drug Administration.
                            ``(xiii) The Director of the Indian Health 
                        Service.
                            ``(xiv) The Secretary of Education.
                            ``(xv) The Secretary of Labor.
                            ``(xvi) The heads of other public and 
                        private entities, as determined appropriate by 
                        the Secretary.
                    ``(B) Review and integrate existing information and 
                recommendations as appropriate, such as Healthy People 
                2010, Institute of Medicine studies, and Surgeon 
                General Reports.
                    ``(C) Ensure inclusion of measurable short-range 
                and long-range goals and objectives, a description of 
                the means for achieving such goals and objectives, and 
                a designated date by which such goals and objectives 
                are expected to be achieved.
                    ``(D) Ensure that all amounts appropriated for such 
                activities are expended in accordance with the National 
                Plan.
                    ``(E) Review the National Plan on at least an 
                annual basis, and report to the public and appropriate 
                committees of Congress on progress.
                    ``(F) Revise such Plan as appropriate.
                    ``(G) Ensure that the National Plan will serve as a 
                binding statement of policy with respect to the 
                agencies' activities related to improving health and 
                eliminating disparities in health and healthcare.
            ``(3) Work with Federal agencies and departments outside of 
        the Department of Health and Human Services as appropriate to 
        maximize resources available to increase understanding about 
        why disparities exist, and effective ways to improve health and 
        eliminate health disparities.
            ``(4) In cooperation with the appropriate agencies, support 
        research, demonstrations, and evaluations to test new and 
        innovative models for--
                    ``(A) expanding healthcare access;
                    ``(B) improving healthcare quality; and
                    ``(C) increasing healthcare educational 
                opportunity.
            ``(5) Develop mechanisms that support better information 
        dissemination, education, prevention, and service delivery to 
        individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds, including 
        individuals who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups 
        or health disparity populations.
            ``(6) Increase awareness of disparities in healthcare, and 
        knowledge and understanding of health risk factors, among 
        healthcare providers, health plans, and the public.
            ``(7) Advise in matters related to the development, 
        implementation, and evaluation of health professions education 
        on improving healthcare outcomes and decreasing disparities in 
        healthcare outcomes, with focus on cultural competence.
            ``(8) Assist healthcare professionals, community and 
        advocacy organizations, academic medical centers and other 
        health entities and public health departments in the design and 
        implementation of programs that will improve health outcomes by 
        strengthening the patient-provider relationship.
            ``(9) Carry out programs to improve access to healthcare 
        services and to improve the quality of healthcare services for 
        individuals with low functional health literacy.
            ``(10) Facilitate the classification and collection of 
        healthcare data to allow for ongoing analysis to identify and 
        determine the causes of disparities and monitoring of progress 
        toward improving health and eliminating health disparities.
            ``(11) Ensure that the National Center for Health 
        Statistics collects data on the health status of each racial or 
        ethnic minority group or health disparity population pursuant 
        to section 2901.
            ``(12) Support a national minority health resource center 
        to carry out the following:
                    ``(A) Facilitate the exchange of information 
                regarding matters relating to health information and 
                health promotion, preventive health services, and 
                education in the appropriate use of healthcare.
                    ``(B) Facilitate access to such information.
                    ``(C) Assist in the analysis of issues and problems 
                relating to such matters.
                    ``(D) Provide technical assistance with respect to 
                the exchange of such information (including 
                facilitating the development of materials for such 
                technical assistance).
            ``(13) Support a center for linguistic and cultural 
        competence to carry out the following:
                    ``(A) With respect to individuals who lack 
                proficiency in speaking the English language, enter 
                into contracts with public and nonprofit private 
                providers of primary health services for the purpose of 
                increasing the access of such individuals to such 
                services by developing and carrying out programs to 
                improve health literacy and cultural competency.
                    ``(B) Carry out programs to improve access to 
                healthcare services for individuals with limited 
                proficiency in speaking the English language. 
                Activities under this subparagraph shall include 
                developing and evaluating model projects.
            ``(14) Enter into interagency agreements with other 
        agencies of the Public Health Service, as appropriate.
            ``(15) Collaborate with the Office for Civil Rights to--
                    ``(A) assist healthcare providers with application 
                of guidance and directives regarding healthcare for 
                racial and ethnic minority and other health disparity 
                populations, including--
                            ``(i) reviewing cases with the Office of 
                        Inspector General and the Office for Civil 
                        Rights which have been closed without a finding 
                        of discrimination to determine if a pattern or 
                        practice of activities that could lead to 
                        discrimination exists, and if such a pattern or 
                        practice is identified, provide technical 
                        assistance or education, as applicable, to the 
                        relevant provider or to a group of providers 
                        located within a particular geographic area;
                            ``(ii) biannually publishing information on 
                        cases filed with the Office for Civil Rights 
                        which have resulted in a finding of 
                        discrimination, including the name and location 
                        of the entity found to have discriminated, and 
                        any findings and agreements entered into 
                        between the Office for Civil Rights and the 
                        entity; and
                            ``(iii) monitoring and analysis of trends 
                        in cases reported to the Office for Civil 
                        Rights to ensure that the Office of Minority 
                        Health and Health Disparity Elimination acts to 
                        educate and assist healthcare providers as 
                        necessary; and
                    ``(B) provide technical assistance or education, as 
                applicable, to the relevant provider or to a group of 
                providers located within a particular geographic area.
            ``(16) Promote and expand efforts to increase racial and 
        ethnic minority enrollment in clinical trials.
            ``(17) Establish working groups--
                    ``(A) to examine and report recommendations to the 
                Secretary regarding--
                            ``(i) emergency preparedness and response 
                        for underserved populations;
                            ``(ii) development and implementation of 
                        health information technology that can assist 
                        providers to deliver culturally competent 
                        healthcare;
                            ``(iii) outreach and education of health 
                        disparity groups about new Federal health 
                        programs, as appropriate, including the 
                        programs under part D of title XVIII of the 
                        Social Security Act and chronic care management 
                        programs under the Medicare Prescription Drug, 
                        Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (and 
                        the amendments made by such Act);
                            ``(iv) leadership development in public 
                        health; and
                            ``(v) other emerging health issues at the 
                        discretion of the Secretary; and
                    ``(B) that include representation from the relevant 
                health agencies, centers and offices, as well as public 
                and private entities as appropriate.
    ``(d) Advisory Committee.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        advisory committee to be known as the Advisory Committee on 
        Minority Health and Health Disparities (in this subsection 
        referred to as the `Committee').
            ``(2) Duties.--The Committee shall provide advice to the 
        Deputy Assistant Secretary carrying out this section, including 
        advice on the development of goals and specific program 
        activities under subsection (c) for racial and ethnic minority 
        groups and health disparity population.
            ``(3) Chair.--The chairperson of the Committee shall be 
        selected by the Secretary from among the members of the voting 
        members of the Committee. The term of office of the chairperson 
        shall be 2 years.
            ``(4) Composition.--
                    ``(A) The Committee shall be composed of 12 voting 
                members appointed in accordance with subparagraph (B), 
                and nonvoting, ex-officio members designated in 
                subparagraph (C).
                    ``(B) The voting members of the Committee shall be 
                appointed by the Secretary from among individuals who 
                are not officers or employees of the Federal Government 
                and who have expertise regarding issues of minority 
                health and health disparities. Racial and ethnic 
                minority groups and health disparity populations shall 
                be appropriately represented among such members.
                    ``(C) The nonvoting, ex officio members of the 
                Committee shall be such officials of the Department of 
                Health and Human Services, including the Director of 
                the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity 
                Elimination and the Office for Civil Rights, and other 
                officials as the Secretary determines to be 
                appropriate.
                    ``(D) The Secretary shall provide an opportunity 
                for the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on 
                Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate to 
                submit to the Secretary names of potential Committee 
                members under this section for consideration.
            ``(5) Terms.--Each member of the Committee shall serve for 
        a term of 4 years, except that the Secretary shall initially 
        appoint a portion of the members to terms of 1 year, 2 years, 
        and 3 years.
            ``(6) Vacancies.--If a vacancy occurs on the Committee, a 
        new member shall be appointed by the Secretary within 90 days 
        from the date that the vacancy occurs, and serve for the 
        remainder of the term for which the predecessor of such member 
        was appointed. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the 
        remaining members to execute the duties of the Committee.
            ``(7) Compensation.--Members of the Committee who are 
        officers or employees of the United States shall serve without 
        additional compensation. Members of the Committee who are not 
        officers or employees of the United States shall receive 
        compensation, for each day (including travel time) they are 
        engaged in the performance of the functions of the Committee. 
        Such compensation may not be in an amount in excess of the 
        daily equivalent of the annual maximum rate of basic pay 
        payable under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15 
        under title 5, United States Code.
    ``(e) Certain Requirements Regarding Duties.--
            ``(1) Recommendations regarding language.--
                    ``(A) Proficiency in speaking english.--The Deputy 
                Assistant Secretary shall consult with the Director of 
                the Office of International and Refugee Health, the 
                Director of the Office for Civil Rights, and the 
                Directors of other appropriate departmental entities 
                regarding recommendations for carrying out activities 
                under subsection (c)(9).
                    ``(B) Health professions education regarding health 
                disparities.--The Deputy Assistant Secretary shall 
                carry out the duties under subsection (c)(7) in 
                collaboration with appropriate personnel of the 
                Department of Health and Human Services, other Federal 
                agencies, and other offices, centers, and institutions, 
                as appropriate, that have responsibilities under the 
                Minority Health and Health Disparities Research and 
                Education Act of 2000.
            ``(2) Resource allocation.--
                    ``(A) Funding.--In carrying out subsection (c), the 
                Secretary shall ensure that such funding and other 
                resources directed to health disparity populations that 
                are not racial and ethnic minority populations are used 
                to supplement, not supplant, funding and other 
                resources currently or historically allocated for 
                services provided to such populations.
                    ``(B) Activities.--When carrying out activities for 
                health disparity populations that are not racial and 
                ethnic minority populations, the Secretary shall ensure 
                that such activities carried out by the Office of 
                Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination 
                supplement, not supplant, the activities of other 
                offices or agencies whose primary mission by 
                established mandate, or current or historical practice 
                is to serve such populations.
            ``(3) Cultural competency of services.--The Secretary shall 
        ensure that information and services provided pursuant to 
        subsection (c) consider the unique cultural or linguistic 
        issues facing such populations and are provided in the 
        language, educational, and cultural context that is most 
        appropriate for the individuals for whom the information and 
        services are intended.
            ``(4) Agency coordination.--In carrying out subsection (c), 
        the Secretary shall ensure that new or existing agency offices 
        of minority health, or other health disparity offices, report 
        current and proposed activities to the Deputy Assistant 
        Secretary, and provide, to the extent practicable, an 
        opportunity for input in the development of such activities by 
        the Deputy Assistant Secretary.
    ``(f) Grants and Contracts Regarding Duties.--
            ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (c), the 
        Secretary acting through the Deputy Assistant Secretary, may 
        make awards of grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts to 
        public and nonprofit private entities.
            ``(2) Process for making awards.--The Deputy Assistant 
        Secretary shall ensure that awards under paragraph (1) are 
        made, to the extent practical, only on a competitive basis, and 
        that a grant is awarded for a proposal only if the proposal has 
        been recommended for such an award through a process of peer 
        review.
            ``(3) Evaluation and dissemination.--The Deputy Assistant 
        Secretary, directly or through contracts with public and 
        private entities, shall provide for evaluations of projects 
        carried out with awards made under paragraph (1) during the 
        preceding 2 fiscal years. The report shall be included in the 
        report required under subsection (g) for the fiscal year 
        involved.
    ``(g) State Offices of Minority Health.--The Deputy Assistant 
Secretary shall assist the voluntary establishment and functions of 
State offices of minority health in order to expand and coordinate 
State efforts to improve the health of minority and other health 
disparity populations.
            ``(1) Priorities.--The Deputy Assistant Secretary may 
        facilitate, with respect to minority and health disparity 
        populations--
                    ``(A) integration and coordination of State and 
                national efforts, including those pertaining to the 
                National Plan pursuant to subsection (b);
                    ``(B) strategic plan development within States to 
                assess and respond to local health concerns;
                    ``(C) education and engagement of key stakeholders 
                within States, including representatives from public 
                health agencies, hospitals, clinics, provider groups, 
                elected officials, community-based organizations, 
                advocacy groups, media, and the private sector;
                    ``(D) development and implementation of accepted 
                standards, core competencies, and minimum 
                infrastructure requirements for State offices;
                    ``(E) access to State level health data for 
                minority and health disparity populations, which may 
                include State data collection and analysis;
                    ``(F) development, implementation, and evaluation 
                of State programs and policies, as appropriate;
                    ``(G) communication and networking among States to 
                share effective policies, programs and practices with 
                respect to increasing access and quality of care;
                    ``(H) recognition and reporting of State successes 
                and challenges; and
                    ``(I) identification of Federal grant programs and 
                other funding for which States could apply to carry out 
                health improvement activities.
            ``(2) Resources.--The Deputy Assistant Secretary may 
        provide grants and technical assistance for the voluntary 
        establishment or capacity development of State offices of 
        minority health.
            ``(3) Collaboration.--To the extent practicable, the Deputy 
        Assistant Secretary may encourage and facilitate collaboration 
        between State offices of minority health and State offices 
        addressing the needs of other health disparity or disadvantaged 
        populations, including offices of rural health.
            ``(4) Definition.--For the purpose of this subsection, 
        `State offices of minority health' include offices, councils, 
        commissions, or advisory panels designated by States or 
        territories to address the health of minority populations.
    ``(h) Reports.--
            ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
        enactment of the Minority Health Improvement and Health 
        Disparity Elimination Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
        appropriate committees of Congress, a report on the National 
        Plan developed under subsection (c).
            ``(2) Report on activities.--Not later than February 1 of 
        fiscal year 2008 and of each second year thereafter, the 
        Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of 
        Congress, a report describing the activities carried out under 
        this section during the preceding 2 fiscal years and evaluating 
        the extent to which such activities have been effective in 
        improving the health of racial and ethnic minority groups and 
        health disparity populations. Each such report shall include 
        the biennial reports submitted under subsection (f)(3) for such 
        years by the heads of the Public Health Service agencies.
            ``(3) Agency reports.--Not later than February 1, 2007, and 
        on a biannual basis thereafter, the heads of the Public Health 
        Service shall submit to the Deputy Assistant Secretary a report 
        that summarizes the minority health and health disparity 
        activities of each of the respective agencies.
    ``(i) Definitions.--In this section:
            ``(1) The term `health disparity population' has the 
        meaning given the term in section 903(d)(1).
            ``(2) The term `racial and ethnic minority group' means 
        American Indians (including Alaska Natives, Eskimos, and 
        Aleuts), Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific 
        Islanders, Blacks, and Hispanics.
            ``(3) The term `Hispanic' means individuals whose origin is 
        Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or of 
        any other Spanish-speaking country.
    ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $110,000,000 
for fiscal year 2007, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal 
years 2008 through 2011.''.
    (b) Transfer of Functions; References.--
            (1) Transfer of functions.--
                    (A) Office of minority health and health disparity 
                elimination.--The functions of the Office of Minority 
                Health under section 1707 of the Public Health Service 
                Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6) as in effect the day before the 
                date of enactment of this Act are transferred to the 
                Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity 
                Elimination under such section 1707 (as amended by 
                subsection (a)).
                    (B) Deputy assistant secretary for minority health 
                and health disparity elimination.--The functions of the 
                Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health of the 
                Office of Minority Health under section 1707 of the 
                Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6) as in 
                effect the day before the date of enactment of this Act 
                are transferred to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
                Minority Health and Health Disparity Elimination of the 
                Office of Minority Health and Health Disparity 
                Elimination under such section 1707 (as amended by 
                subsection (a)).
            (2) References.--
                    (A) Office of minority health and health disparity 
                elimination.--Any reference in any Federal law, 
                Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of 
                authority, or any document of or pertaining to the 
                Office of Minority Health under section 1707 of the 
                Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6) as in 
                effect the day before the enactment of this Act is 
                deemed to be a reference to the Office of Minority 
                Health and Health Disparity Elimination under such 
                section 1707 (as amended by subsection (a)).
                    (B) Deputy assistant secretary for minority health 
                and health disparity elimination.--Any reference in any 
                Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or 
                delegation of authority, or any document of or 
                pertaining to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
                Minority Health of the Office of Minority Health under 
                section 1707 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
                U.S.C. 300u-6) as in effect the day before the 
                enactment of this Act is deemed to be a reference to 
                the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and 
                Health Disparity Elimination of the Office of Minority 
                Health and Health Disparity Elimination under such 
                section 1707 (as amended by subsection (a)).
[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1675 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






117th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                S. 1675

                      To improve maternal health.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                              May 18, 2021

   Mr. Warnock (for himself, Mr. Rubio, Ms. Smith, Mr. Marshall, Ms. 
Hassan, and Mr. Cassidy) introduced the following bill; which was read 
 twice and referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
                                Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
                      To improve maternal health.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Maternal Health Quality Improvement 
Act''.

SEC. 2. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended by inserting after section 330N of such Act, the following:

``SEC. 330O. INNOVATION FOR MATERNAL HEALTH.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with experts 
representing a variety of clinical specialties, State, tribal, or local 
public health officials, researchers, epidemiologists, statisticians, 
and community organizations, shall establish or continue a program to 
award competitive grants to eligible entities for the purpose of--
            ``(1) identifying, developing, or disseminating best 
        practices to improve maternal health care quality, improve 
        maternal and infant health outcomes, eliminate preventable 
        maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity, and improve 
        infant health outcomes, which may include--
                    ``(A) information on evidence-based practices to 
                improve the quality and safety of maternal health care 
                in hospitals and other health care settings of a State 
                or health care system by addressing topics commonly 
                associated with health complications or risks related 
                to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum 
                care;
                    ``(B) best practices for improving maternal health 
                care based on data findings and reviews conducted by a 
                State maternal mortality review committee that address 
                topics of relevance to common complications or health 
                risks related to prenatal care, labor care, birthing, 
                and postpartum care; and
                    ``(C) information on addressing determinants of 
                health that impact maternal health outcomes for women 
                before, during, and after pregnancy;
            ``(2) collaborating with State maternal mortality review 
        committees to identify issues for the development and 
        implementation of evidence-based practices to improve maternal 
        health outcomes and reduce preventable maternal mortality and 
        severe maternal morbidity, consistent with section 317K;
            ``(3) providing technical assistance and supporting the 
        implementation of best practices identified in paragraph (1) to 
        entities providing health care services to pregnant and 
        postpartum women; and
            ``(4) identifying, developing, and evaluating new models of 
        care that improve maternal and infant health outcomes, which 
        may include the integration of community-based services and 
        clinical care.
    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) submit to the Secretary an application at such time, 
        in such manner, and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require; and
            ``(2) demonstrate in such application that the entity is 
        capable of carrying out data-driven maternal safety and quality 
        improvement initiatives in the areas of obstetrics and 
        gynecology or maternal health.
    ``(c) Report.--Not later than September 30, 2024, and every 2 years 
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the 
practices described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a). Such 
report shall include a description of the extent to which such 
practices reduced preventable maternal mortality and severe maternal 
morbidity, and whether such practices improved maternal and infant 
health. The Secretary shall disseminate information on such practices, 
as appropriate.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $9,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.

SEC. 3. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by striking 
section 763 (42 U.S.C. 294p) and inserting the following:

``SEC. 763. TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    ``(a) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to 
award grants to accredited schools of allopathic medicine, osteopathic 
medicine, and nursing, and other health professional training programs 
for the training of health care professionals to improve the provision 
of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care for racial 
and ethnic minority populations, including with respect to perceptions 
and biases that may affect the approach to, and provision of, care.
    ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection 
(a), an entity described in such subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Reporting Requirements.--
            ``(1) Periodic grantee reports.--Each entity awarded a 
        grant under this section shall periodically submit to the 
        Secretary a report on the status of activities conducted using 
        the grant, including a description of the impact of such 
        training on patient outcomes, as applicable.
            ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than September 30, 
        2024, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the 
        activities conducted using grants under subsection (a) and any 
        best practices identified and disseminated under subsection 
        (d).
    ``(d) Best Practices.--The Secretary may identify and disseminate 
best practices for the training described in subsection (a).
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.

SEC. 4. STUDY ON IMPROVING TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

    Not later than 2 years after date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, through a contract with 
an independent research organization, conduct a study and make 
recommendations for accredited schools of allopathic medicine, 
osteopathic medicine, and nursing, and other health professional 
training programs on best practices related to training to improve the 
provision of prenatal care, labor care, birthing, and postpartum care 
for racial and ethnic minority populations, including with respect to 
perceptions and biases that may affect the approach to, and provision 
of, care.

SEC. 5. PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVES.

    (a) In General.--Section 317K(a)(2) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-12(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
            ``(E)(i) The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in coordination 
        with other offices and agencies, as appropriate, shall 
        establish or continue a competitive grant program for the 
        establishment or support of perinatal quality collaboratives to 
        improve perinatal care and perinatal health outcomes for 
        pregnant and postpartum women and their infants. A State, 
        Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization may use funds received 
        through such grant to--
                    ``(I) support the use of evidence-based or 
                evidence-informed practices to improve outcomes for 
                maternal and infant health;
                    ``(II) work with clinical teams; experts; State, 
                local, and, as appropriate, tribal public health 
                officials; and stakeholders, including patients and 
                families, to identify, develop, or disseminate best 
                practices to improve perinatal care and outcomes; and
                    ``(III) employ strategies that provide 
                opportunities for health care professionals and 
                clinical teams to collaborate across health care 
                settings and disciplines, including primary care and 
                mental health, as appropriate, to improve maternal and 
                infant health outcomes, which may include the use of 
                data to provide timely feedback across hospital and 
                clinical teams to inform responses, and to provide 
                support and training to hospital and clinical teams for 
                quality improvement, as appropriate.
            ``(ii) To be eligible for a grant under clause (i), an 
        entity shall submit to the Secretary an application in such 
        form and manner and containing such information as the 
        Secretary may require.''.
    (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than September 30, 2025, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress a 
report regarding the activities conducted by recipients of grants under 
subsection (a)(2)(E) of section 317K of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 247b-12).

SEC. 6. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    (a) Grants.--Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
241 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330O of such Act, as 
added by section 2, the following:

``SEC. 330P. INTEGRATED SERVICES FOR PREGNANT AND POSTPARTUM WOMEN.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award grants for the purpose 
of establishing or operating evidence-based or innovative, evidence-
informed programs to deliver integrated health care services to 
pregnant and postpartum women to optimize the health of women and their 
infants, including to reduce adverse maternal health outcomes, 
pregnancy-related deaths, and related health disparities (including 
such disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
populations), and, as appropriate, by addressing issues researched 
under subsection (b)(2) of section 317K.
    ``(b) Integrated Services for Pregnant and Postpartum Women.--
            ``(1) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
        subsection (a), a State, Indian Tribe, or Tribal organization 
        (as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-
        Determination and Education Assistance Act) shall work with 
        relevant stakeholders that coordinate care to develop and carry 
        out the program, including--
                    ``(A) State, Tribal, and local agencies responsible 
                for Medicaid, public health, social services, mental 
                health, and substance use disorder treatment and 
                services;
                    ``(B) health care providers who serve pregnant and 
                postpartum women; and
                    ``(C) community-based health organizations and 
                health workers, including providers of home visiting 
                services and individuals representing communities with 
                disproportionately high rates of maternal mortality and 
                severe maternal morbidity, and including those 
                representing racial and ethnic minority populations.
            ``(2) Terms.--
                    ``(A) Period.--A grant awarded under subsection (a) 
                shall be made for a period of 5 years. Any supplemental 
                award made to a grantee under subsection (a) may be 
                made for a period of less than 5 years.
                    ``(B) Preference.--In awarding grants under 
                subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
                            ``(i) give preference to States, Indian 
                        Tribes, and Tribal organizations that have the 
                        highest rates of maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity relative to other such 
                        States, Indian Tribes, or Tribal organizations, 
                        respectively; and
                            ``(ii) shall consider health disparities 
                        related to maternal mortality and severe 
                        maternal morbidity, including such disparities 
                        associated with racial and ethnic minority 
                        populations.
                    ``(C) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall require 
                grantees to evaluate the outcomes of the programs 
                supported under the grant.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026.''.
    (b) Report on Grant Outcomes and Dissemination of Best Practices.--
            (1) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2026, the Secretary 
        of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Committee on 
        Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
        Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
        Representatives a report that describes--
                    (A) the outcomes of the activities supported by the 
                grants awarded under the amendments made by this 
                section on maternal and child health;
                    (B) best practices and models of care used by 
                recipients of grants under such amendments; and
                    (C) obstacles identified by recipients of grants 
                under such amendments, and strategies used by such 
                recipients to deliver care, improve maternal and child 
                health, and reduce health disparities.
            (2) Dissemination of best practices.--Not later than August 
        1, 2026, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
        disseminate information on best practices and models of care 
        used by recipients of grants under the amendments made by this 
        section (including best practices and models of care relating 
        to the reduction of health disparities, including such 
        disparities associated with racial and ethnic minority 
        populations, in rates of maternal mortality and severe maternal 
        morbidity) to relevant stakeholders, which may include health 
        providers, medical schools, nursing schools, relevant State, 
        tribal, and local agencies, and the general public.
[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1880 Enrolled Bill (ENR)]

        S.1880

                       One Hundred Sixth Congress

                                 of the

                        United States of America


                          AT THE SECOND SESSION

           Begun and held at the City of Washington on Monday,
             the twenty-fourth day of January, two thousand


                                 An Act


 
To amend the Public Health Service Act to improve the health of minority 
                              individuals.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Minority Health 
and Health Disparities Research and Education Act of 2000''.
    (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings.

   TITLE I--IMPROVING MINORITY HEALTH AND REDUCING HEALTH DISPARITIES 
 THROUGH NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH; ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER

Sec. 101. Establishment of National Center on Minority Health and Health 
          Disparities.
Sec. 102. Centers of excellence for research education and training.
Sec. 103. Extramural loan repayment program for minority health 
          disparities research.
Sec. 104. General provisions regarding the Center.
Sec. 105. Report regarding resources of National Institutes of Health 
          dedicated to minority and other health disparities research.

TITLE II--HEALTH DISPARITIES RESEARCH BY AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH 
                               AND QUALITY

Sec. 201. Health disparities research by Agency for Healthcare Research 
          and Quality.

        TITLE III--DATA COLLECTION RELATING TO RACE OR ETHNICITY

Sec. 301. Study and report by National Academy of Sciences.

                 TITLE IV--HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION

Sec. 401. Health professions education in health disparities.
Sec. 402. National conference on health professions education and health 
          disparities.
Sec. 403. Advisory responsibilities in health professions education in 
          health disparities and cultural competency.

  TITLE V--PUBLIC AWARENESS AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON HEALTH 
                               DISPARITIES

Sec. 501. Public awareness and information dissemination.

                   TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 601. Departmental definition regarding minority individuals.
Sec. 602. Conforming provision regarding definitions.
Sec. 603. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

    The Congress finds as follows:
        (1) Despite notable progress in the overall health of the 
    Nation, there are continuing disparities in the burden of illness 
    and death experienced by African Americans, Hispanics, Native 
    Americans, Alaska Natives, and Asian Pacific Islanders, compared to 
    the United States population as a whole.
        (2) The largest numbers of the medically underserved are white 
    individuals, and many of them have the same health care access 
    problems as do members of minority groups. Nearly 20,000,000 white 
    individuals live below the poverty line with many living in 
    nonmetropolitan, rural areas such as Appalachia, where the high 
    percentage of counties designated as health professional shortage 
    areas (47 percent) and the high rate of poverty contribute to 
    disparity outcomes. However, there is a higher proportion of racial 
    and ethnic minorities in the United States represented among the 
    medically underserved.
        (3) There is a national need for minority scientists in the 
    fields of biomedical, clinical, behavioral, and health services 
    research. Ninety percent of minority physicians educated at 
    Historically Black Medical Colleges live and serve in minority 
    communities.
        (4) Demographic trends inspire concern about the Nation's 
    ability to meet its future scientific, technological, and 
    engineering workforce needs. Historically, non-Hispanic white males 
    have made up the majority of the United States scientific, 
    technological, and engineering workers.
        (5) The Hispanic and Black population will increase 
    significantly in the next 50 years. The scientific, technological, 
    and engineering workforce may decrease if participation by 
    underrepresented minorities remains the same.
        (6) Increasing rates of Black and Hispanic workers can help 
    ensure a strong scientific, technological, and engineering 
    workforce.
        (7) Individuals such as underrepresented minorities and women 
    in the scientific, technological, and engineering workforce enable 
    society to address its diverse needs.
        (8) If there had not been a substantial increase in the number 
    of science and engineering degrees awarded to women and 
    underrepresented minorities over the past few decades, the United 
    States would be facing even greater shortages in scientific, 
    technological, and engineering workers.
        (9) In order to effectively promote a diverse and strong 21st 
    century scientific, technological, and engineering workforce, 
    Federal agencies should expand or add programs that effectively 
    overcome barriers such as educational transition from one level to 
    the next and student requirements for financial resources.
        (10) Federal agencies should work in concert with the private 
    nonprofit sector to emphasize the recruitment and retention of 
    qualified individuals from ethnic and gender groups that are 
    currently underrepresented in the scientific, technological, and 
    engineering workforce.
        (11) Behavioral and social sciences research has increased 
    awareness and understanding of factors associated with health care 
    utilization and access, patient attitudes toward health services, 
    and risk and protective behaviors that affect health and illness. 
    These factors have the potential to then be modified to help close 
    the health disparities gap among ethnic minority populations. In 
    addition, there is a shortage of minority behavioral science 
    researchers and behavioral health care professionals. According to 
    the National Science Foundation, only 15.5 percent of behavioral 
    research-oriented psychology doctorate degrees were awarded to 
    minority students in 1997. In addition, only 17.9 percent of 
    practice-oriented psychology doctorate degrees were awarded to 
    ethnic minorities.

  TITLE I--IMPROVING MINORITY HEALTH AND REDUCING HEALTH DISPARITIES 
THROUGH NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH; ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER

    SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER ON MINORITY HEALTH AND 
      HEALTH DISPARITIES.
    (a) In General.--Part E of title IV of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 287 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following subpart:

 ``Subpart 6--National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities

``SEC. 485E. PURPOSE OF CENTER.

    ``(a) In General.--The general purpose of the National Center on 
Minority Health and Health Disparities (in this subpart referred to as 
the `Center') is the conduct and support of research, training, 
dissemination of information, and other programs with respect to 
minority health conditions and other populations with health 
disparities.
    ``(b) Priorities.--The Director of the Center shall in expending 
amounts appropriated under this subpart give priority to conducting and 
supporting minority health disparities research.
    ``(c) Minority Health Disparities Research.--For purposes of this 
subpart:
        ``(1) The term `minority health disparities research' means 
    basic, clinical, and behavioral research on minority health 
    conditions (as defined in paragraph (2)), including research to 
    prevent, diagnose, and treat such conditions.
        ``(2) The term `minority health conditions', with respect to 
    individuals who are members of minority groups, means all diseases, 
    disorders, and conditions (including with respect to mental health 
    and substance abuse)--
            ``(A) unique to, more serious, or more prevalent in such 
        individuals;
            ``(B) for which the factors of medical risk or types of 
        medical intervention may be different for such individuals, or 
        for which it is unknown whether such factors or types are 
        different for such individuals; or
            ``(C) with respect to which there has been insufficient 
        research involving such individuals as subjects or insufficient 
        data on such individuals.
        ``(3) The term `minority group' has the meaning given the term 
    `racial and ethnic minority group' in section 1707.
        ``(4) The terms `minority' and `minorities' refer to 
    individuals from a minority group.
    ``(d) Health Disparity Populations.--For purposes of this subpart:
        ``(1) A population is a health disparity population if, as 
    determined by the Director of the Center after consultation with 
    the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
    there is a significant disparity in the overall rate of disease 
    incidence, prevalence, morbidity, mortality, or survival rates in 
    the population as compared to the health status of the general 
    population.
        ``(2) The Director shall give priority consideration to 
    determining whether minority groups qualify as health disparity 
    populations under paragraph (1).
        ``(3) The term `health disparities research' means basic, 
    clinical, and behavioral research on health disparity populations 
    (including individual members and communities of such populations) 
    that relates to health disparities as defined under paragraph (1), 
    including the causes of such disparities and methods to prevent, 
    diagnose, and treat such disparities.
    ``(e) Coordination of Activities.--The Director of the Center shall 
act as the primary Federal official with responsibility for 
coordinating all minority health disparities research and other health 
disparities research conducted or supported by the National Institutes 
of Health, and--
        ``(1) shall represent the health disparities research program 
    of the National Institutes of Health, including the minority health 
    disparities research program, at all relevant Executive branch task 
    forces, committees and planning activities; and
        ``(2) shall maintain communications with all relevant Public 
    Health Service agencies, including the Indian Health Service, and 
    various other departments of the Federal Government to ensure the 
    timely transmission of information concerning advances in minority 
    health disparities research and other health disparities research 
    between these various agencies for dissemination to affected 
    communities and health care providers.
    ``(f) Collaborative Comprehensive Plan and Budget.--
        ``(1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this section 
    and other applicable law, the Director of NIH, the Director of the 
    Center, and the directors of the other agencies of the National 
    Institutes of Health in collaboration (and in consultation with the 
    advisory council for the Center) shall--
            ``(A) establish a comprehensive plan and budget for the 
        conduct and support of all minority health disparities research 
        and other health disparities research activities of the 
        agencies of the National Institutes of Health (which plan and 
        budget shall be first established under this subsection not 
        later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this 
        subpart);
            ``(B) ensure that the plan and budget establish priorities 
        among the health disparities research activities that such 
        agencies are authorized to carry out;
            ``(C) ensure that the plan and budget establish objectives 
        regarding such activities, describes the means for achieving 
        the objectives, and designates the date by which the objectives 
        are expected to be achieved;
            ``(D) ensure that, with respect to amounts appropriated for 
        activities of the Center, the plan and budget give priority in 
        the expenditure of funds to conducting and supporting minority 
        health disparities research;
            ``(E) ensure that all amounts appropriated for such 
        activities are expended in accordance with the plan and budget;
            ``(F) review the plan and budget not less than annually, 
        and revise the plan and budget as appropriate;
            ``(G) ensure that the plan and budget serve as a broad, 
        binding statement of policies regarding minority health 
        disparities research and other health disparities research 
        activities of the agencies, but do not remove the 
        responsibility of the heads of the agencies for the approval of 
        specific programs or projects, or for other details of the 
        daily administration of such activities, in accordance with the 
        plan and budget; and
            ``(H) promote coordination and collaboration among the 
        agencies conducting or supporting minority health or other 
        health disparities research.
        ``(2) Certain components of plan and budget.--With respect to 
    health disparities research activities of the agencies of the 
    National Institutes of Health, the Director of the Center shall 
    ensure that the plan and budget under paragraph (1) provide for--
            ``(A) basic research and applied research, including 
        research and development with respect to products;
            ``(B) research that is conducted by the agencies;
            ``(C) research that is supported by the agencies;
            ``(D) proposals developed pursuant to solicitations by the 
        agencies and for proposals developed independently of such 
        solicitations; and
            ``(E) behavioral research and social sciences research, 
        which may include cultural and linguistic research in each of 
        the agencies.
        ``(3) Minority health disparities research.--The plan and 
    budget under paragraph (1) shall include a separate statement of 
    the plan and budget for minority health disparities research.
    ``(g) Participation in Clinical Research.--The Director of the 
Center shall work with the Director of NIH and the directors of the 
agencies of the National Institutes of Health to carry out the 
provisions of section 492B that relate to minority groups.
    ``(h) Research Endowments.--
        ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Center may carry out a 
    program to facilitate minority health disparities research and 
    other health disparities research by providing for research 
    endowments at centers of excellence under section 736.
        ``(2) Eligibility.--The Director of the Center may provide for 
    a research endowment under paragraph (1) only if the institution 
    involved meets the following conditions:
            ``(A) The institution does not have an endowment that is 
        worth in excess of an amount equal to 50 percent of the 
        national average of endowment funds at institutions that 
        conduct similar biomedical research or training of health 
        professionals.
            ``(B) The application of the institution under paragraph 
        (1) regarding a research endowment has been recommended 
        pursuant to technical and scientific peer review and has been 
        approved by the advisory council under subsection (j).
    ``(i) Certain Activities.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
Director of the Center--
        ``(1) shall assist the Director of the National Center for 
    Research Resources in carrying out section 481(c)(3) and in 
    committing resources for construction at Institutions of Emerging 
    Excellence;
        ``(2) shall establish projects to promote cooperation among 
    Federal agencies, State, local, tribal, and regional public health 
    agencies, and private entities in health disparities research; and
        ``(3) may utilize information from previous health initiatives 
    concerning minorities and other health disparity populations.
    ``(j) Advisory Council.--
        ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall, in accordance with 
    section 406, establish an advisory council to advise, assist, 
    consult with, and make recommendations to the Director of the 
    Center on matters relating to the activities described in 
    subsection (a), and with respect to such activities to carry out 
    any other functions described in section 406 for advisory councils 
    under such section. Functions under the preceding sentence shall 
    include making recommendations on budgetary allocations made in the 
    plan under subsection (f), and shall include reviewing reports 
    under subsection (k) before the reports are submitted under such 
    subsection.
        ``(2) Membership.--With respect to the membership of the 
    advisory council under paragraph (1), a majority of the members 
    shall be individuals with demonstrated expertise regarding minority 
    health disparity and other health disparity issues; representatives 
    of communities impacted by minority and other health disparities 
    shall be included; and a diversity of health professionals shall be 
    represented. The membership shall in addition include a 
    representative of the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences 
    Research under section 404A.
    ``(k) Annual Report.--The Director of the Center shall prepare an 
annual report on the activities carried out or to be carried out by the 
Center, and shall submit each such report to the Committee on Health, 
Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, the Committee on Commerce 
of the House of Representatives, the Secretary, and the Director of 
NIH. With respect to the fiscal year involved, the report shall--
        ``(1) describe and evaluate the progress made in health 
    disparities research conducted or supported by the national 
    research institutes;
        ``(2) summarize and analyze expenditures made for activities 
    with respect to health disparities research conducted or supported 
    by the National Institutes of Health;
        ``(3) include a separate statement applying the requirements of 
    paragraphs (1) and (2) specifically to minority health disparities 
    research; and
        ``(4) contain such recommendations as the Director considers 
    appropriate.
    ``(l) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 
for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 
fiscal years 2002 through 2005. Such authorization of appropriations is 
in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are 
available for the conduct and support of minority health disparities 
research or other health disparities research by the agencies of the 
National Institutes of Health.''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Part A of title IV of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 281 et seq.) is amended--
        (1) in section 401(b)(2)--
            (A) in subparagraph (F), by moving the subparagraph two ems 
        to the left; and
            (B) by adding at the end the following subparagraph:
        ``(G) The National Center on Minority Health and Health 
    Disparities.''; and
        (2) by striking section 404.
    SEC. 102. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE FOR RESEARCH EDUCATION AND 
      TRAINING.
    Subpart 6 of part E of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, 
as added by section 101(a) of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:
``SEC. 485F. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE FOR RESEARCH EDUCATION AND TRAINING.
    ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Center shall make awards of 
grants or contracts to designated biomedical and behavioral research 
institutions under paragraph (1) of subsection (c), or to consortia 
under paragraph (2) of such subsection, for the purpose of assisting 
the institutions in supporting programs of excellence in biomedical and 
behavioral research training for individuals who are members of 
minority health disparity populations or other health disparity 
populations.
    ``(b) Required Use of Funds.--An award may be made under subsection 
(a) only if the applicant involved agrees that the grant will be 
expended--
        ``(1) to train members of minority health disparity populations 
    or other health disparity populations as professionals in the area 
    of biomedical or behavioral research or both; or
        ``(2) to expand, remodel, renovate, or alter existing research 
    facilities or construct new research facilities for the purpose of 
    conducting minority health disparities research and other health 
    disparities research.
    ``(c) Centers of Excellence.--
        ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, a designated 
    biomedical and behavioral research institution is a biomedical and 
    behavioral research institution that--
            ``(A) has a significant number of members of minority 
        health disparity populations or other health disparity 
        populations enrolled as students in the institution (including 
        individuals accepted for enrollment in the institution);
            ``(B) has been effective in assisting such students of the 
        institution to complete the program of education or training 
        and receive the degree involved;
            ``(C) has made significant efforts to recruit minority 
        students to enroll in and graduate from the institution, which 
        may include providing means-tested scholarships and other 
        financial assistance as appropriate; and
            ``(D) has made significant recruitment efforts to increase 
        the number of minority or other members of health disparity 
        populations serving in faculty or administrative positions at 
        the institution.
        ``(2) Consortium.--Any designated biomedical and behavioral 
    research institution involved may, with other biomedical and 
    behavioral institutions (designated or otherwise), including tribal 
    health programs, form a consortium to receive an award under 
    subsection (a).
        ``(3) Application of criteria to other programs.--In the case 
    of any criteria established by the Director of the Center for 
    purposes of determining whether institutions meet the conditions 
    described in paragraph (1), this section may not, with respect to 
    minority health disparity populations or other health disparity 
    populations, be construed to authorize, require, or prohibit the 
    use of such criteria in any program other than the program 
    established in this section.
    ``(d) Duration of Grant.--The period during which payments are made 
under a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed 5 years. Such 
payments shall be subject to annual approval by the Director of the 
Center and to the availability of appropriations for the fiscal year 
involved to make the payments.
    ``(e) Maintenance of Effort.--
        ``(1) In general.--With respect to activities for which an 
    award under subsection (a) is authorized to be expended, the 
    Director of the Center may not make such an award to a designated 
    research institution or consortium for any fiscal year unless the 
    institution, or institutions in the consortium, as the case may be, 
    agree to maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such 
    activities at a level that is not less than the level of such 
    expenditures maintained by the institutions involved for the fiscal 
    year preceding the fiscal year for which such institutions receive 
    such an award.
        ``(2) Use of federal funds.--With respect to any Federal 
    amounts received by a designated research institution or consortium 
    and available for carrying out activities for which an award under 
    subsection (a) is authorized to be expended, the Director of the 
    Center may make such an award only if the institutions involved 
    agree that the institutions will, before expending the award, 
    expend the Federal amounts obtained from sources other than the 
    award.
    ``(f) Certain Expenditures.--The Director of the Center may 
authorize a designated biomedical and behavioral research institution 
to expend a portion of an award under subsection (a) for research 
endowments.
    ``(g) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
        ``(1) The term `designated biomedical and behavioral research 
    institution' has the meaning indicated for such term in subsection 
    (c)(1). Such term includes any health professions school receiving 
    an award of a grant or contract under section 736.
        ``(2) The term `program of excellence' means any program 
    carried out by a designated biomedical and behavioral research 
    institution with an award under subsection (a), if the program is 
    for purposes for which the institution involved is authorized in 
    subsection (b) to expend the grant.
    ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of making 
grants under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated 
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 
2005.''.
    SEC. 103. EXTRAMURAL LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR MINORITY HEALTH 
      DISPARITIES RESEARCH.
    Subpart 6 of part E of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 102 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:
``SEC. 485G. LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR MINORITY HEALTH DISPARITIES 
RESEARCH.
    ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Center shall establish a 
program of entering into contracts with qualified health professionals 
under which such health professionals agree to engage in minority 
health disparities research or other health disparities research in 
consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to repay, for each 
year of engaging in such research, not more than $35,000 of the 
principal and interest of the educational loans of such health 
professionals.
    ``(b) Service Provisions.--The provisions of sections 338B, 338C, 
and 338E shall, except as inconsistent with subsection (a), apply to 
the program established in such subsection to the same extent and in 
the same manner as such provisions apply to the National Health Service 
Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of 
title III.
    ``(c) Requirement Regarding Health Disparity Populations.--The 
Director of the Center shall ensure that not fewer than 50 percent of 
the contracts entered into under subsection (a) are for appropriately 
qualified health professionals who are members of a health disparity 
population.
    ``(d) Priority.--With respect to minority health disparities 
research and other health disparities research under subsection (a), 
the Secretary shall ensure that priority is given to conducting 
projects of biomedical research.
    ``(e) Funding.--
        ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of 
    carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated 
    such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 
    through 2005.
        ``(2) Availability of appropriations.--Amounts available for 
    carrying out this section shall remain available until the 
    expiration of the second fiscal year beginning after the fiscal 
    year for which the amounts were made available.''.

SEC. 104. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING THE CENTER.

    Subpart 6 of part E of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 103 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:

``SEC. 485H. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING THE CENTER.

    ``(a) Administrative Support for Center.--The Secretary, acting 
through the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall 
provide administrative support and support services to the Director of 
the Center and shall ensure that such support takes maximum advantage 
of existing administrative structures at the agencies of the National 
Institutes of Health.
    ``(b) Evaluation and Report.--
        ``(1) Evaluation.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the 
    enactment of this subpart, the Secretary shall conduct an 
    evaluation to--
            ``(A) determine the effect of this subpart on the planning 
        and coordination of health disparities research programs at the 
        agencies of the National Institutes of Health;
            ``(B) evaluate the extent to which this subpart has 
        eliminated the duplication of administrative resources among 
        such Institutes, centers and divisions; and
            ``(C) provide, to the extent determined by the Secretary to 
        be appropriate, recommendations concerning future legislative 
        modifications with respect to this subpart, for both minority 
        health disparities research and other health disparities 
        research.
        ``(2) Minority health disparities research.--The evaluation 
    under paragraph (1) shall include a separate statement that applies 
    subparagraphs (A) and (B) of such paragraph to minority health 
    disparities research.
        ``(3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which 
    the evaluation is commenced under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
    shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, 
    Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on Commerce of 
    the House of Representatives, a report concerning the results of 
    such evaluation.''.
    SEC. 105. REPORT REGARDING RESOURCES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF 
      HEALTH DEDICATED TO MINORITY AND OTHER HEALTH DISPARITIES 
      RESEARCH.
    Not later than December 1, 2003, the Director of the National 
Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities (established by the 
amendment made by section 101(a)), after consultation with the advisory 
council for such Center, shall submit to the Congress, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, and the Director of the National Institutes 
of Health a report that provides the following:
        (1) Recommendations for the methodology that should be used to 
    determine the extent of the resources of the National Institutes of 
    Health that are dedicated to minority health disparities research 
    and other health disparities research, including determining the 
    amount of funds that are used to conduct and support such research. 
    With respect to such methodology, the report shall address any 
    discrepancies between the methodology used by such Institutes as of 
    the date of the enactment of this Act and the methodology used by 
    the Institute of Medicine as of such date.
        (2) A determination of whether and to what extent, relative to 
    fiscal year 1999, there has been an increase in the level of 
    resources of the National Institutes of Health that are dedicated 
    to minority health disparities research, including the amount of 
    funds used to conduct and support such research. The report shall 
    include provisions describing whether and to what extent there have 
    been increases in the number and amount of awards to minority 
    serving institutions.

TITLE II--HEALTH DISPARITIES RESEARCH BY AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH 
                              AND QUALITY

    SEC. 201. HEALTH DISPARITIES RESEARCH BY AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE 
      RESEARCH AND QUALITY.
    (a)  In General.--Part A of title IX of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 299 et seq.) is amended--
        (1) in section 902, by striking subsection (g); and
        (2) by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 903. RESEARCH ON HEALTH DISPARITIES.

    ``(a) In General.--The Director shall--
        ``(1) conduct and support research to identify populations for 
    which there is a significant disparity in the quality, outcomes, 
    cost, or use of health care services or access to and satisfaction 
    with such services, as compared to the general population;
        ``(2) conduct and support research on the causes of and 
    barriers to reducing the health disparities identified in paragraph 
    (1), taking into account such factors as socioeconomic status, 
    attitudes toward health, the language spoken, the extent of formal 
    education, the area or community in which the population resides, 
    and other factors the Director determines to be appropriate;
        ``(3) conduct and support research and support demonstration 
    projects to identify, test, and evaluate strategies for reducing or 
    eliminating health disparities, including development or 
    identification of effective service delivery models, and 
    disseminate effective strategies and models;
        ``(4) develop measures and tools for the assessment and 
    improvement of the outcomes, quality, and appropriateness of health 
    care services provided to health disparity populations;
        ``(5) in carrying out section 902(c), provide support to 
    increase the number of researchers who are members of health 
    disparity populations, and the health services research capacity of 
    institutions that train such researchers; and
        ``(6) beginning with fiscal year 2003, annually submit to the 
    Congress a report regarding prevailing disparities in health care 
    delivery as it relates to racial factors and socioeconomic factors 
    in priority populations.
    ``(b) Research and Demonstration Projects.--
        ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director 
    shall conduct and support research and support demonstrations to--
            ``(A) identify the clinical, cultural, socioeconomic, 
        geographic, and organizational factors that contribute to 
        health disparities, including minority health disparity 
        populations, which research shall include behavioral research, 
        such as examination of patterns of clinical decisionmaking, and 
        research on access, outreach, and the availability of related 
        support services (such as cultural and linguistic services);
            ``(B) identify and evaluate clinical and organizational 
        strategies to improve the quality, outcomes, and access to care 
        for health disparity populations, including minority health 
        disparity populations;
            ``(C) test such strategies and widely disseminate those 
        strategies for which there is scientific evidence of 
        effectiveness; and
            ``(D) determine the most effective approaches for 
        disseminating research findings to health disparity 
        populations, including minority populations.
        ``(2) Use of certain strategies.--In carrying out this section, 
    the Director shall implement research strategies and mechanisms 
    that will enhance the involvement of individuals who are members of 
    minority health disparity populations or other health disparity 
    populations, health services researchers who are such individuals, 
    institutions that train such individuals as researchers, members of 
    minority health disparity populations or other health disparity 
    populations for whom the Agency is attempting to improve the 
    quality and outcomes of care, and representatives of appropriate 
    tribal or other community-based organizations with respect to 
    health disparity populations. Such research strategies and 
    mechanisms may include the use of--
            ``(A) centers of excellence that can demonstrate, either 
        individually or through consortia, a combination of multi-
        disciplinary expertise in outcomes or quality improvement 
        research, linkages to relevant sites of care, and a 
        demonstrated capacity to involve members and communities of 
        health disparity populations, including minority health 
        disparity populations, in the planning, conduct, dissemination, 
        and translation of research;
            ``(B) provider-based research networks, including health 
        plans, facilities, or delivery system sites of care (especially 
        primary care), that make extensive use of health care providers 
        who are members of health disparity populations or who serve 
        patients in such populations and have the capacity to evaluate 
        and promote quality improvement;
            ``(C) service delivery models (such as health centers under 
        section 330 and the Indian Health Service) to reduce health 
        disparities; and
            ``(D) innovative mechanisms or strategies that will 
        facilitate the translation of past research investments into 
        clinical practices that can reasonably be expected to benefit 
        these populations.
    ``(c) Quality Measurement Development.--
        ``(1) In general.--To ensure that health disparity populations, 
    including minority health disparity populations, benefit from the 
    progress made in the ability of individuals to measure the quality 
    of health care delivery, the Director shall support the development 
    of quality of health care measures that assess the experience of 
    such populations with health care systems, such as measures that 
    assess the access of such populations to health care, the cultural 
    competence of the care provided, the quality of the care provided, 
    the outcomes of care, or other aspects of health care practice that 
    the Director determines to be important.
        ``(2) Examination of certain practices.--The Director shall 
    examine the practices of providers that have a record of reducing 
    health disparities or have experience in providing culturally 
    competent health services to minority health disparity populations 
    or other health disparity populations. In examining such practices 
    of providers funded under the authorities of this Act, the Director 
    shall consult with the heads of the relevant agencies of the Public 
    Health Service.
        ``(3) Report.--Not later than 36 months after the date of the 
    enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through the 
    Director, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of 
    Congress a report describing the state-of-the-art of quality 
    measurement for minority and other health disparity populations 
    that will identify critical unmet needs, the current activities of 
    the Department to address those needs, and a description of related 
    activities in the private sector.
    ``(d) Definition.--For purposes of this section:
        ``(1) The term `health disparity population' has the meaning 
    given such term in section 485E, except that in addition to the 
    meaning so given, the Director may determine that such term 
    includes populations for which there is a significant disparity in 
    the quality, outcomes, cost, or use of health care services or 
    access to or satisfaction with such services as compared to the 
    general population.
        ``(2) The term `minority', with respect to populations, refers 
    to racial and ethnic minority groups as defined in section 1707.''.
    (b) Funding.--Section 927 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 299c-6) is amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(d) Health Disparities Research.--For the purpose of carrying out 
the activities under section 903, there are authorized to be 
appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be 
necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2005.''.

        TITLE III--DATA COLLECTION RELATING TO RACE OR ETHNICITY

SEC. 301. STUDY AND REPORT BY NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.

    (a) Study.--The National Academy of Sciences shall conduct a 
comprehensive study of the Department of Health and Human Services' 
data collection systems and practices, and any data collection or 
reporting systems required under any of the programs or activities of 
the Department, relating to the collection of data on race or 
ethnicity, including other Federal data collection systems (such as the 
Social Security Administration) with which the Department interacts to 
collect relevant data on race and ethnicity.
    (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the National Academy of Sciences shall prepare and submit to 
the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
and the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives, a report 
that--
        (1) identifies the data needed to support efforts to evaluate 
    the effects of socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity on access 
    to health care and other services and on disparity in health and 
    other social outcomes and the data needed to enforce existing 
    protections for equal access to health care;
        (2) examines the effectiveness of the systems and practices of 
    the Department of Health and Human Services described in subsection 
    (a), including pilot and demonstration projects of the Department, 
    and the effectiveness of selected systems and practices of other 
    Federal, State, and tribal agencies and the private sector, in 
    collecting and analyzing such data;
        (3) contains recommendations for ensuring that the Department 
    of Health and Human Services, in administering its entire array of 
    programs and activities, collects, or causes to be collected, 
    reliable and complete information relating to race and ethnicity; 
    and
        (4) includes projections about the costs associated with the 
    implementation of the recommendations described in paragraph (3), 
    and the possible effects of the costs on program operations.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for fiscal year 2001.

                 TITLE IV--HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION

SEC. 401. HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION IN HEALTH DISPARITIES.

    (a) In General.--Part B of title VII of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 293 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 740 
the following:

``SEC. 741. GRANTS FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION.

    ``(a) Grants for Health Professions Education in Health Disparities 
and Cultural Competency.--
        ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
    Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
    may make awards of grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to 
    public and nonprofit private entities (including tribal entities) 
    for the purpose of carrying out research and demonstration projects 
    (including research and demonstration projects for continuing 
    health professions education) for training and education of health 
    professionals for the reduction of disparities in health care 
    outcomes and the provision of culturally competent health care.
        ``(2) Eligible entities.--Unless specifically required 
    otherwise in this title, the Secretary shall accept applications 
    for grants or contracts under this section from health professions 
    schools, academic health centers, State or local governments, or 
    other appropriate public or private nonprofit entities (or 
    consortia of entities, including entities promoting 
    multidisciplinary approaches) for funding and participation in 
    health professions training activities. The Secretary may accept 
    applications from for-profit private entities as determined 
    appropriate by the Secretary.
    ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out subsection (a), $3,500,000 for fiscal year 
2001, $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, 
and $3,500,000 for fiscal year 2004.''.
    (b) Nursing Education.--Part A of title VIII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 296 et seq.) is amended--
        (1) by redesignating section 807 as section 808; and
        (2) by inserting after section 806 the following:

``SEC. 807. GRANTS FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION.

    ``(a) Grants for Health Professions Education in Health Disparities 
and Cultural Competency.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may 
make awards of grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to eligible 
entities for the purpose of carrying out research and demonstration 
projects (including research and demonstration projects for continuing 
health professions education) for training and education for the 
reduction of disparities in health care outcomes and the provision of 
culturally competent health care. Grants under this section shall be 
the same as provided in section 741.''.
    ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are to be 
appropriated to carry out subsection (a) such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.''.
    SEC. 402. NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION AND 
      HEALTH DISPARITIES.
    (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this 
section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall convene a national conference on health professions education as 
a method for reducing disparities in health outcomes.
    (b) Participants.--The Secretary shall include in the national 
conference convened under subsection (a) advocacy groups and 
educational entities as described in section 741 of the Public Health 
Service Act (as added by section 401), tribal health programs, health 
centers under section 330 of such Act, and other interested parties.
    (c) Issues.--The national conference convened under subsection (a) 
shall include, but is not limited to, issues that address the role and 
impact of health professions education on the reduction of disparities 
in health outcomes, including the role of education on cultural 
competency. The conference shall focus on methods to achieve reductions 
in disparities in health outcomes through health professions education 
(including continuing education programs) and strategies for outcomes 
measurement to assess the effectiveness of education in reducing 
disparities.
    (d) Publication of Findings.--Not later than 6 months after the 
national conference under subsection (a) has convened, the Secretary 
shall publish in the Federal Register a summary of the proceedings and 
findings of the conference.
    (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
    SEC. 403. ADVISORY RESPONSIBILITIES IN HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION 
      IN HEALTH DISPARITIES AND CULTURAL COMPETENCY.
    Section 1707 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-6) is 
amended--
        (1) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following 
    paragraph:
        ``(10) Advise in matters related to the development, 
    implementation, and evaluation of health professions education in 
    decreasing disparities in health care outcomes, including cultural 
    competency as a method of eliminating health disparities.'';
        (2) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``paragraphs (1) through 
    (9)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (1) through (10)''; and
        (3) in subsection (d), by amending paragraph (1) to read as 
    follows:
        ``(1) Recommendations regarding language.--
            ``(A) Proficiency in speaking english.--The Deputy 
        Assistant Secretary shall consult with the Director of the 
        Office of International and Refugee Health, the Director of the 
        Office of Civil Rights, and the Directors of other appropriate 
        departmental entities regarding recommendations for carrying 
        out activities under subsection (b)(9).
            ``(B) Health professions education regarding health 
        disparities.--The Deputy Assistant Secretary shall carry out 
        the duties under subsection (b)(10) in collaboration with 
        appropriate personnel of the Department of Health and Human 
        Services, other Federal agencies, and other offices, centers, 
        and institutions, as appropriate, that have responsibilities 
        under the Minority Health and Health Disparities Research and 
        Education Act of 2000.''.

 TITLE V--PUBLIC AWARENESS AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON HEALTH 
                              DISPARITIES

SEC. 501. PUBLIC AWARENESS AND INFORMATION DISSEMINATION.

    (a) Public Awareness on Health Disparities.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
``Secretary'') shall conduct a national campaign to inform the public 
and health care professionals about health disparities in minority and 
other underserved populations by disseminating information and 
materials available on specific diseases affecting these populations 
and programs and activities to address these disparities. The campaign 
shall--
        (1) have a specific focus on minority and other underserved 
    communities with health disparities; and
        (2) include an evaluation component to assess the impact of the 
    national campaign in raising awareness of health disparities and 
    information on available resources.
    (b) Dissemination of Information on Health Disparities.--The 
Secretary shall develop and implement a plan for the dissemination of 
information and findings with respect to health disparities under 
titles I, II, III, and IV of this Act. The plan shall--
        (1) include the participation of all agencies of the Department 
    of Health and Human Services that are responsible for serving 
    populations included in the health disparities research; and
        (2) have agency-specific strategies for disseminating relevant 
    findings and information on health disparities and improving health 
    care services to affected communities.

                   TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

    SEC. 601. DEPARTMENTAL DEFINITION REGARDING MINORITY INDIVIDUALS.
    Section 1707(g)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300u-6) is amended--
        (1) by striking ``Asian Americans and'' and inserting ``Asian 
    Americans;''; and
        (2) by inserting ``Native Hawaiians and other'' before 
    ``Pacific Islanders;''.

SEC. 602. CONFORMING PROVISION REGARDING DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this Act, the term ``racial and ethnic minority 
group'' has the meaning given such term in section 1707 of the Public 
Health Service Act.

SEC. 603. EFFECTIVE DATE.

    This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect October 1, 
2000, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs 
later.

                               Speaker of the House of Representatives.

                            Vice President of the United States and    
                                               President of the Senate.
[Congressional Bills 112th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1227 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

112th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                S. 1227

                       To improve Arctic health.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                             June 16, 2011

  Mr. Begich introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
  referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
                       To improve Arctic health.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Better Health in the Arctic Act''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

    Congress finds the following:
            (1) The United States is an Arctic nation with--
                    (A) an approximately 700-mile border on the Arctic 
                Ocean;
                    (B) more than 100,000,000 acres of land above the 
                Arctic Circle; and
                    (C) an even broader area that is defined as Arctic 
                by temperature, including the Bering Sea and Aleutian 
                Islands.
            (2) The Arctic region of the United States--
                    (A) is known to the indigenous population as 
                Inuvikput, or the ``place where we live''; and
                    (B) is home to an indigenous population that has 
                subsisted for millennia on the abundance of marine 
                mammals, fish, and wildlife, many species of which are 
                unique to the Arctic region.
            (3) Since 1959, temperatures in the Arctic region of the 
        United States have warmed by 3 to 4 degrees Celsius, a rate of 
        increase more than twice the global average. The Arctic ice 
        pack is rapidly diminishing and thinning, and the National 
        Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimates the Arctic 
        Ocean may be ice free during the summer months in as few as 30 
        years.
            (4) These changes are having a significant impact on the 
        communities and ecosystems of the indigenous people of the 
        Arctic, and the marine mammals, fish, and wildlife upon which 
        the indigenous population depends.
            (5) The negative impacts of climate change include health 
        problems, which are even more exacerbated among indigenous 
        people of the North.
            (6) Northern people have shorter life expectancy and 
        increased mortality related to suicide and injuries, when 
        compared to populations living in more moderate climates.
            (7) Among the greatest health disparities affecting Arctic 
        people are higher rates of alcohol abuse, Fetal Alcohol 
        Spectrum Disorder (FASD), diabetes, high blood pressure, 
        injury, and cancer. The FASD prevalence rate among Alaska 
        Native people (4.8) is 3\1/2\ times that for all Alaskans 
        (1.4).
            (8) Rates of suicide in Alaska are among the highest in the 
        Nation, with the suicide rate among Alaska Native people about 
        3 times that of non-Native Alaskans and 4 times that of the 
        national average of the United States.
            (9) Alaska Native children are more than twice as likely to 
        live in poverty than Alaskans of other races, 25.7 percent 
        compared to 10.9 percent.
            (10) It is unclear why many of these health problems are 
        greater among northern people or whether the health problems 
        are related to toxic influences, socioeconomic status, cultural 
        change, distance from sophisticated medical care, or other 
        factors.
            (11) More research is necessary into the causes of 
        disparities in rates of particular public health problems in 
        the Arctic and intervention into the prevention and treatment 
        of these problems.

SEC. 3. STUDY OF MENTAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND PHYSICAL HEALTH ISSUES IN THE 
              ARCTIC.

    (a) Study Authorized.--The Arctic Research Commission established 
under section 103 of the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 (15 
U.S.C. 4102) shall, in collaboration with Federal health agencies, 
directly or through contract, prepare and submit to Congress a 2-year 
study to examine the science base, gaps in knowledge, and strategies 
for the prevention and treatment of mental, behavioral, and physical 
health problems faced by populations in the Arctic, with a focus on 
Alaska.
    (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section a total of $1,200,000 for fiscal 
years 2012 and 2013.

SEC. 4. NATIONAL ARCTIC HEALTH SCIENCE POLICY.

    (a) Updating 1984 Policy.--The Director of the National Institutes 
of Health shall, in collaboration with other governmental agencies and 
private and nonprofit entities involved in Arctic health issues, 
develop a national Arctic health science policy. In developing the 
policy, the Director shall review and take into consideration the 
National Arctic Health Science Policy developed by the American Public 
Health Association Task Force in 1984.
    (b) Desk for Arctic Health.--Section 401(c) of the Public Health 
Services Act (42 U.S.C. 281(c)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
            ``(3) Desk for arctic health.--
                    ``(A) Establishment.--Within the Division, there is 
                established a Desk for Arctic Health.
                    ``(B) Duties.--The Desk for Arctic Health shall--
                            ``(i) work with the Interagency Arctic 
                        Research Policy Committee established under 
                        section 107(b) of the Arctic Research and 
                        Policy Act of 1984 (15 U.S.C. 4106(b)) to 
                        ensure adequate health representation from 
                        Federal agencies;
                            ``(ii) collaborate and consult with 
                        governmental entities and United States 
                        nongovernmental organizations involved in 
                        Arctic health issues, including the State of 
                        Alaska, University of Alaska, and entities that 
                        handle issues regarding the health of the 
                        indigenous people of the Arctic; and
                            ``(iii) collaborate with the Canadian 
                        Institutes of Health Research on indigenous 
                        Arctic people health issues, in accordance with 
                        the 2004 agreement between the National 
                        Institutes of Health and the Canadian 
                        Institutes of Health Research, and with other 
                        international entities dealing with pan-Arctic 
                        health issues.''.

SEC. 5. ARCTIC HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.

    Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
280g et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 399V-6. ARCTIC HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.

    ``(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
            ``(1) The health impact assessment process can be a 
        valuable tool for better Arctic health by objectively 
        evaluating the potential health benefits and risks of a project 
        or policy before the project or policy is built or put into 
        place.
            ``(2) Health impact assessments can provide recommendations 
        to increase positive health outcomes and minimize adverse 
        health outcomes.
            ``(3) A major benefit of the health impact assessment 
        process is that it brings public health issues to the attention 
        of people who make decisions about areas that fall outside 
        traditional public health arenas, such as transportation or 
        land use.
    ``(b) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall establish a 
program at the National Center of Environmental Health of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention to foster advances and help provide 
technical support in the field of Arctic health impact assessments.
    ``(c) Definition of Health Impact Assessments.--In this section, 
the term `health impact assessment' means a combination of procedures, 
methods, and tools by which a policy, program, or project may be judged 
as to its potential effects on the health of a population, and the 
distribution of those effects within the population.''.

[Congressional Bills 116th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4714 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






116th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 4714

                To preserve health benefits for workers.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                           September 24, 2020

Mr. Durbin (for himself, Ms. Cortez Masto, Mr. Brown, Mrs. Shaheen, Ms. 
    Smith, Ms. Klobuchar, Mrs. Feinstein, Mr. Bennet, Mr. Reed, Mr. 
 Merkley, Mr. Blumenthal, Ms. Duckworth, Ms. Stabenow, Ms. Rosen, and 
 Mr. Menendez) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
                  referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
                To preserve health benefits for workers.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Worker Health Coverage Protection 
Act''.

SEC. 2. PRESERVING HEALTH BENEFITS FOR WORKERS.

    (a) Premium Assistance for COBRA Continuation Coverage and 
Furloughed Continuation Coverage for Individuals and Their Families.--
            (1) Provision of premium assistance.--
                    (A) Reduction of premiums payable.--
                            (i) COBRA continuation coverage.--In the 
                        case of any premium for a period of coverage 
                        during the period beginning on March 1, 2020, 
                        and ending on January 31, 2021, for COBRA 
                        continuation coverage with respect to any 
                        assistance eligible individual described in 
                        paragraph (3)(A), such individual shall be 
                        treated for purposes of any COBRA continuation 
                        provision as having paid the amount of such 
                        premium if such individual pays (and any person 
                        other than such individual's employer pays on 
                        behalf of such individual) 0 percent of the 
                        amount of such premium owed by such individual 
                        (as determined without regard to this 
                        subsection).
                            (ii) Furloughed continuation coverage.--In 
                        the case of any premium for a period of 
                        coverage during the period beginning on March 
                        1, 2020, and ending on January 31, 2021, for 
                        coverage under a group health plan with respect 
                        to any assistance eligible individual described 
                        in paragraph (3)(B), such individual shall be 
                        treated for purposes of coverage under the plan 
                        offered by the plan sponsor in which the 
                        individual is enrolled as having paid the 
                        amount of such premium if such individual pays 
                        (and any person other than such individual's 
                        employer pays on behalf of such individual) 0 
                        percent of the amount of such premium owed by 
                        such individual (as determined without regard 
                        to this subsection).
                    (B) Plan enrollment option.--
                            (i) In general.--Notwithstanding the COBRA 
                        continuation provisions, any assistance 
                        eligible individual who is enrolled in a group 
                        health plan offered by a plan sponsor, not 
                        later than 90 days after the date of notice of 
                        the plan enrollment option described in this 
                        subparagraph, may elect to enroll in coverage 
                        under a plan offered by such plan sponsor that 
                        is different than coverage under the plan in 
                        which such individual was enrolled at the 
                        time--
                                    (I) in the case of any assistance 
                                eligible individual described in 
                                paragraph (3)(A), the qualifying event 
                                specified in section 603(2) of the 
                                Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
                                of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1163(2)), section 
                                4980B(f)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue 
                                Code of 1986, section 2203(2) of the 
                                Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
                                300bb-3(2)), or section 8905a of title 
                                5, United States Code (except for the 
                                voluntary termination of such 
                                individual's employment by such 
                                individual), occurred, and such 
                                coverage shall be treated as COBRA 
                                continuation coverage for purposes of 
                                the applicable COBRA continuation 
                                coverage provision; or
                                    (II) in the case of any assistance 
                                eligible individual described in 
                                paragraph (3)(B), the furlough period 
                                began with respect to such individual.
                            (ii) Requirements.--Any assistance eligible 
                        individual may elect to enroll in different 
                        coverage as described in clause (i) only if--
                                    (I) the employer involved has made 
                                a determination that such employer will 
                                permit such assistance eligible 
                                individual to enroll in different 
                                coverage as provided under this 
                                subparagraph;
                                    (II) the premium for such different 
                                coverage does not exceed the premium 
                                for coverage in which such individual 
                                was enrolled at the time such 
                                qualifying event occurred or 
                                immediately before such furlough began;
                                    (III) the different coverage in 
                                which the individual elects to enroll 
                                is coverage that is also offered to the 
                                active employees of the employer, who 
                                are not in a furlough period, at the 
                                time at which such election is made; 
                                and
                                    (IV) the different coverage in 
                                which the individual elects to enroll 
                                is not--
                                            (aa) coverage that provides 
                                        only dental, vision, 
                                        counseling, or referral 
                                        services (or a combination of 
                                        such services);
                                            (bb) a qualified small 
                                        employer health reimbursement 
                                        arrangement (as defined in 
                                        section 9831(d)(2) of the 
                                        Internal Revenue Code of 1986);
                                            (cc) a flexible spending 
                                        arrangement (as defined in 
                                        section 106(c)(2) of the 
                                        Internal Revenue Code of 1986); 
                                        or
                                            (dd) benefits that provide 
                                        coverage for services or 
                                        treatments furnished in an on-
                                        site medical facility 
                                        maintained by the employer and 
                                        that consists primarily of 
                                        first-aid services, prevention 
                                        and wellness care, or similar 
                                        care (or a combination of such 
                                        care).
                    (C) Premium reimbursement.--For provisions 
                providing the payment of such premium, see section 6432 
                of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by 
                paragraph (14).
            (2) Limitation of period of premium assistance.--
                    (A) Eligibility for additional coverage.--Paragraph 
                (1)(A) shall not apply with respect to--
                            (i) any assistance eligible individual 
                        described in paragraph (3)(A) for months of 
                        coverage beginning on or after the earlier of--
                                    (I) the first date that such 
                                individual is eligible for coverage 
                                under any other group health plan 
                                (other than coverage consisting of only 
                                dental, vision, counseling, or referral 
                                services (or a combination thereof), 
                                coverage under a flexible spending 
                                arrangement (as defined in section 
                                106(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code 
                                of 1986), coverage of treatment that is 
                                furnished in an on-site medical 
                                facility maintained by the employer and 
                                that consists primarily of first-aid 
                                services, prevention and wellness care, 
                                or similar care (or a combination 
                                thereof)), or eligible for benefits 
                                under the Medicare program under title 
                                XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
                                U.S.C. 1395 et seq.); or
                                    (II) the earlier of--
                                            (aa) the date following the 
                                        expiration of the maximum 
                                        period of continuation coverage 
                                        required under the applicable 
                                        COBRA continuation coverage 
                                        provision; or
                                            (bb) the date following the 
                                        expiration of the period of 
                                        continuation coverage allowed 
                                        under paragraph (4)(B)(ii); or
                            (ii) any assistance eligible individual 
                        described in paragraph (3)(B) for months of 
                        coverage beginning on or after the earlier of--
                                    (I) the first date that such 
                                individual is eligible for coverage 
                                under any other group health plan 
                                (other than coverage consisting of only 
                                dental, vision, counseling, or referral 
                                services (or a combination thereof), 
                                coverage under a flexible spending 
                                arrangement (as defined in section 
                                106(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code 
                                of 1986), coverage of treatment that is 
                                furnished in an on-site medical 
                                facility maintained by the employer and 
                                that consists primarily of first-aid 
                                services, prevention and wellness care, 
                                or similar care (or a combination 
                                thereof)), or eligible for benefits 
                                under the Medicare program under title 
                                XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 
                                U.S.C. 1395 et seq.); or
                                    (II) the first date that such 
                                individual is no longer in the furlough 
                                period.
                    (B) Notification requirement.--Any assistance 
                eligible individual shall notify the group health plan 
                with respect to which paragraph (1)(A) applies if such 
                paragraph ceases to apply by reason of clause (i)(I) or 
                (ii)(I) of subparagraph (A) (as applicable). Such 
                notice shall be provided to the group health plan in 
                such time and manner as may be specified by the 
                Secretary of Labor.
                    (C) Special enrollment period following expiration 
                of premium assistance.--Notwithstanding section 1311 of 
                the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 
                U.S.C. 18031), the expiration of premium assistance 
                pursuant to a limitation specified under subparagraph 
                (A) shall be treated as a qualifying event for which 
                any assistance eligible individual is eligible to 
                enroll in a qualified health plan offered through an 
                Exchange under title I of such Act (42 U.S.C. 18001 et 
                seq.) during a special enrollment period.
            (3) Assistance eligible individual.--For purposes of this 
        section, the term ``assistance eligible individual'' means, 
        with respect to a period of coverage during the period 
        beginning on March 1, 2020, and ending on January 31, 2021--
                    (A) any individual that is a qualified beneficiary 
                that--
                            (i) is eligible for COBRA continuation 
                        coverage by reason of a qualifying event 
                        specified in section 603(2) of the Employee 
                        Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
                        U.S.C. 1163(2)), section 4980B(f)(3)(B) of the 
                        Internal Revenue Code of 1986, section 2203(2) 
                        of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
                        300bb-3(2)), or section 8905a of title 5, 
                        United States Code (except for the voluntary 
                        termination of such individual's employment by 
                        such individual); and
                            (ii) elects such coverage; or
                    (B) any covered employee that is in a furlough 
                period that remains eligible for coverage under a group 
                health plan offered by the employer of such covered 
                employee.
            (4) Extension of election period and effect on coverage.--
                    (A) In general.--For purposes of applying section 
                605(a) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
                of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1165(a)), section 4980B(f)(5)(A) of 
                the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, section 2205(a) of 
                the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-5(a)), 
                and section 8905a(c)(2) of title 5, United States Code, 
                in the case of--
                            (i) an individual who does not have an 
                        election of COBRA continuation coverage in 
                        effect on the date of the enactment of this Act 
                        but who would be an assistance eligible 
                        individual described in paragraph (3)(A) if 
                        such election were so in effect; or
                            (ii) an individual who elected COBRA 
                        continuation coverage on or after March 1, 
                        2020, and discontinued from such coverage 
                        before the date of the enactment of this Act,
                such individual may elect the COBRA continuation 
                coverage under the COBRA continuation coverage 
                provisions containing such provisions during the period 
                beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and 
                ending 60 days after the date on which the notification 
                required under paragraph (7)(C) is provided to such 
                individual.
                    (B) Commencement of cobra continuation coverage.--
                Any COBRA continuation coverage elected by a qualified 
                beneficiary during an extended election period under 
                subparagraph (A)--
                            (i) shall apply as if such qualified 
                        beneficiary had been covered as of the date of 
                        a qualifying event specified in section 603(2) 
                        of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
                        of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1163(2)), section 
                        4980B(f)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
                        1986, section 2203(2) of the Public Health 
                        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-3(2)), or section 
                        8905a of title 5, United States Code, except 
                        for the voluntary termination of such 
                        beneficiary's employment by such beneficiary, 
                        that occurs no earlier than March 1, 2020 
                        (including the treatment of premium payments 
                        under paragraph (1)(A) and any cost-sharing 
                        requirements for items and services under a 
                        group health plan); and
                            (ii) shall not extend beyond the period of 
                        COBRA continuation coverage that would have 
                        been required under the applicable COBRA 
                        continuation coverage provision if the coverage 
                        had been elected as required under such 
                        provision.
            (5) Expedited review of denials of premium assistance.--In 
        any case in which an individual requests treatment as an 
        assistance eligible individual described in subparagraph (A) or 
        (B) of paragraph (3) and is denied such treatment by the group 
        health plan, the Secretary of Labor (or the Secretary of Health 
        and Human Services in connection with COBRA continuation 
        coverage which is provided other than pursuant to part 6 of 
        subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income 
        Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1161 et seq.)), in consultation 
        with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall provide for expedited 
        review of such denial. An individual shall be entitled to such 
        review upon application to such Secretary in such form and 
        manner as shall be provided by such Secretary, in consultation 
        with the Secretary of Treasury. Such Secretary shall make a 
        determination regarding such individual's eligibility within 15 
        business days after receipt of such individual's application 
        for review under this paragraph. Either Secretary's 
        determination upon review of the denial shall be de novo and 
        shall be the final determination of such Secretary. A reviewing 
        court shall grant deference to such Secretary's determination. 
        The provisions of this paragraph, paragraphs (1) through (4), 
        and paragraphs (7) through (9) shall be treated as provisions 
        of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
        1974 (29 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.) for purposes of part 5 of 
        subtitle B of such title.
            (6) Disregard of subsidies for purposes of federal and 
        state programs.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
        any premium assistance with respect to an assistance eligible 
        individual under this subsection shall not be considered 
        income, in-kind support, or resources for purposes of 
        determining the eligibility of the recipient (or the 
        recipient's spouse or family) for benefits or assistance, or 
        the amount or extent of benefits or assistance, or any other 
        benefit provided under any Federal program or any program of a 
        State or political subdivision thereof financed in whole or in 
        part with Federal funds.
            (7) COBRA-specific notice.--
                    (A) General notice.--
                            (i) In general.--In the case of notices 
                        provided under section 606(a)(4) of the 
                        Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
                        (29 U.S.C. 1166(4)), section 4980B(f)(6)(D) of 
                        the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, section 
                        2206(4) of the Public Health Service Act (42 
                        U.S.C. 300bb-6(4)), or section 8905a(f)(2)(A) 
                        of title 5, United States Code, with respect to 
                        individuals who, during the period described in 
                        paragraph (3), become entitled to elect COBRA 
                        continuation coverage, the requirements of such 
                        provisions shall not be treated as met unless 
                        such notices include an additional notification 
                        to the recipient a written notice in clear and 
                        understandable language of--
                                    (I) the availability of premium 
                                assistance with respect to such 
                                coverage under this subsection; and
                                    (II) the option to enroll in 
                                different coverage if the employer 
                                permits assistance eligible individuals 
                                described in paragraph (3)(A) to elect 
                                enrollment in different coverage (as 
                                described in paragraph (1)(B)).
                            (ii) Alternative notice.--In the case of 
                        COBRA continuation coverage to which the notice 
                        provision under such sections does not apply, 
                        the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with 
                        the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary 
                        of Health and Human Services, shall, in 
                        consultation with administrators of the group 
                        health plans (or other entities) that provide 
                        or administer the COBRA continuation coverage 
                        involved, provide rules requiring the provision 
                        of such notice.
                            (iii) Form.--The requirement of the 
                        additional notification under this subparagraph 
                        may be met by amendment of existing notice 
                        forms or by inclusion of a separate document 
                        with the notice otherwise required.
                    (B) Specific requirements.--Each additional 
                notification under subparagraph (A) shall include--
                            (i) the forms necessary for establishing 
                        eligibility for premium assistance under this 
                        subsection;
                            (ii) the name, address, and telephone 
                        number necessary to contact the plan 
                        administrator and any other person maintaining 
                        relevant information in connection with such 
                        premium assistance;
                            (iii) a description of the extended 
                        election period provided for in paragraph 
                        (4)(A);
                            (iv) a description of the obligation of the 
                        qualified beneficiary under paragraph (2)(B) 
                        and the penalty provided under section 6720C of 
                        the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for failure 
                        to carry out the obligation;
                            (v) a description, displayed in a prominent 
                        manner, of the qualified beneficiary's right to 
                        a reduced premium and any conditions on 
                        entitlement to the reduced premium;
                            (vi) a description of the option of the 
                        qualified beneficiary to enroll in different 
                        coverage if the employer permits such 
                        beneficiary to elect to enroll in such 
                        different coverage under paragraph (1)(B); and
                            (vii) information regarding any Exchange 
                        established under title I of the Patient 
                        Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 
                        18001 et seq.) through which a qualified 
                        beneficiary may be eligible to enroll in a 
                        qualified health plan, including--
                                    (I) the publicly accessible 
                                internet website address for such 
                                Exchange;
                                    (II) the publicly accessible 
                                internet website address for the Find 
                                Local Help directory maintained by the 
                                Department of Health and Human Services 
                                on the healthcare.gov internet website 
                                (or a successor website);
                                    (III) a clear explanation that--
                                            (aa) an individual who is 
                                        eligible for continuation 
                                        coverage may also be eligible 
                                        to enroll, with financial 
                                        assistance, in a qualified 
                                        health plan offered through 
                                        such Exchange, but, in the case 
                                        that such individual elects to 
                                        enroll in such continuation 
                                        coverage and subsequently 
                                        elects to terminate such 
                                        continuation coverage before 
                                        the period of such continuation 
                                        coverage expires, such 
                                        termination does not initiate a 
                                        special enrollment period 
                                        (absent a qualifying event 
                                        specified in section 603(2) of 
                                        the Employee Retirement Income 
                                        Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
                                        1163(2)), section 
                                        4980B(f)(3)(B) of the Internal 
                                        Revenue Code of 1986, section 
                                        2203(2) of the Public Health 
                                        Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-
                                        3(2)), or section 8905a of 
                                        title 5, United States Code, 
                                        with respect to such 
                                        individual); and
                                            (bb) an individual who 
                                        elects to enroll in 
                                        continuation coverage will 
                                        remain eligible to enroll in a 
                                        qualified health plan offered 
                                        through such Exchange during an 
                                        open enrollment period and may 
                                        be eligible for financial 
                                        assistance with respect to 
                                        enrolling in such a qualified 
                                        health plan;
                                    (IV) information on consumer 
                                protections with respect to enrolling 
                                in a qualified health plan offered 
                                through such Exchange, including the 
                                requirement for such a qualified health 
                                plan to provide coverage for essential 
                                health benefits (as defined in section 
                                1302(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
                                18022(b))) and the requirements 
                                applicable to such a qualified health 
                                plan under part A of title XXVII of the 
                                Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
                                300gg et seq.);
                                    (V) information on the availability 
                                of financial assistance with respect to 
                                enrolling in a qualified health plan, 
                                including the maximum income limit for 
                                eligibility for the premium tax credit 
                                under section 36B of the Internal 
                                Revenue Code of 1986; and
                                    (VI) information on any special 
                                enrollment periods during which any 
                                assistance eligible individual 
                                described in paragraph (3)(A)(i) may be 
                                eligible to enroll, with financial 
                                assistance, in a qualified health plan 
                                offered through such Exchange 
                                (including a special enrollment period 
                                for which an individual may be eligible 
                                due to the expiration of premium 
                                assistance pursuant to a limitation 
                                specified under paragraph (2)(A)).
                    (C) Notice in connection with extended election 
                periods.--In the case of any assistance eligible 
                individual described in paragraph (3)(A) (or any 
                individual described in paragraph (4)(A)) who became 
                entitled to elect COBRA continuation coverage before 
                the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
                administrator of the applicable group health plan (or 
                other entity) shall provide (within 60 days after the 
                date of enactment of this Act) for the additional 
                notification required to be provided under subparagraph 
                (A) and failure to provide such notice shall be treated 
                as a failure to meet the notice requirements under the 
                applicable COBRA continuation provision.
                    (D) Model notices.--Not later than 30 days after 
                the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to any 
                assistance eligible individual described in paragraph 
                (3)(A)--
                            (i) the Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
                        with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
                        Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
                        prescribe models for the additional 
                        notification required under this paragraph 
                        (other than the additional notification 
                        described in clause (ii)); and
                            (ii) in the case of any additional 
                        notification provided pursuant to subparagraph 
                        (A) under section 8905a(f)(2)(A) of title 5, 
                        United States Code, the Office of Personnel 
                        Management shall prescribe a model for such 
                        additional notification.
            (8) Furlough-specific notice.--
                    (A) In general.--With respect to any assistance 
                eligible individual described in paragraph (3)(B) who, 
                during the period described in such paragraph, becomes 
                eligible for assistance pursuant to paragraph 
                (1)(A)(ii), the requirements of section 606(a)(4) of 
                the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 
                U.S.C. 1166(4)), section 4980B(f)(6)(D) of the Internal 
                Revenue Code of 1986, section 2206(4) of the Public 
                Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-6(4)), or section 
                8905a(f)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code, shall 
                not be treated as met unless the group health plan 
                administrator, in accordance with the timing 
                requirement specified under subparagraph (B), provides 
                to the individual a written notice in clear and 
                understandable language of--
                            (i) the availability of premium assistance 
                        with respect to such coverage under this 
                        subsection;
                            (ii) the option of the qualified 
                        beneficiary to enroll in different coverage if 
                        the employer permits such beneficiary to elect 
                        to enroll in such different coverage under 
                        paragraph (1)(B); and
                            (iii) the information specified under 
                        paragraph (7)(B) (as applicable).
                    (B) Timing specified.--For purposes of subparagraph 
                (A), the timing requirement specified in this 
                subparagraph is--
                            (i) with respect to such an individual who 
                        is within a furlough period during the period 
                        beginning on March 1, 2020, and ending on the 
                        date of the enactment of this Act, 30 days 
                        after the date of such enactment; and
                            (ii) with respect to such an individual who 
                        is within a furlough period during the period 
                        beginning on the first day after the date of 
                        the enactment of this Act and ending on January 
                        31, 2021, 30 days after the date of the 
                        beginning of such furlough period.
                    (C) Model notices.--Not later than 30 days after 
                the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to any 
                assistance eligible individual described in paragraph 
                (3)(B)--
                            (i) the Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
                        with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
                        Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
                        prescribe models for the notification required 
                        under this paragraph (other than the 
                        notification described in clause (ii)); and
                            (ii) in the case of any notification 
                        provided pursuant to subparagraph (A) under 
                        section 8905a(f)(2)(A) of title 5, United 
                        States Code, the Office of Personnel Management 
                        shall prescribe a model for such notification.
            (9) Notice of expiration of period of premium assistance.--
                    (A) In general.--With respect to any assistance 
                eligible individual, subject to subparagraph (B), the 
                requirements of section 606(a)(4) of the Employee 
                Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
                1166(4)), section 4980B(f)(6)(D) of the Internal 
                Revenue Code of 1986, section 2206(4) of the Public 
                Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-6(4)), or section 
                8905a(f)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code, shall 
                not be treated as met unless the employer of the 
                individual, during the period specified under 
                subparagraph (C), provides to such individual a written 
                notice in clear and understandable language--
                            (i) that the premium assistance for such 
                        individual will expire soon and the prominent 
                        identification of the date of such expiration;
                            (ii) that such individual may be eligible 
                        for coverage without any premium assistance 
                        through--
                                    (I) COBRA continuation coverage; or
                                    (II) coverage under a group health 
                                plan;
                            (iii) that the expiration of premium 
                        assistance is treated as a qualifying event for 
                        which any assistance eligible individual is 
                        eligible to enroll in a qualified health plan 
                        offered through an Exchange under title I of 
                        such Act (42 U.S.C. 18001 et seq.) during a 
                        special enrollment period; and
                            (iv) the information specified in paragraph 
                        (7)(B)(vii).
                    (B) Exception.--The requirement for the group 
                health plan administrator to provide the written notice 
                under subparagraph (A) shall be waived in the case the 
                premium assistance for such individual expires pursuant 
                to clause (i)(I) or (ii)(I) of paragraph (2)(A).
                    (C) Period specified.--For purposes of subparagraph 
                (A), the period specified in this subparagraph is, with 
                respect to the date of expiration of premium assistance 
                for any assistance eligible individual pursuant to a 
                limitation requiring a notice under this paragraph, the 
                period beginning on the day that is 45 days before the 
                date of such expiration and ending on the day that is 
                15 days before the date of such expiration.
                    (D) Model notices.--Not later than 30 days after 
                the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to any 
                assistance eligible individual--
                            (i) the Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
                        with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
                        Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
                        prescribe models for the notification required 
                        under this paragraph (other than the 
                        notification described in clause (ii)); and
                            (ii) in the case of any notification 
                        provided pursuant to subparagraph (A) under 
                        section 8905a(f)(2)(A) of title 5, United 
                        States Code, the Office of Personnel Management 
                        shall prescribe a model for such notification.
            (10) Regulations.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the 
        Secretary of Labor may jointly prescribe such regulations or 
        other guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out 
        the provisions of this subsection, including the prevention of 
        fraud and abuse under this subsection, except that the 
        Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of Health and Human 
        Services may prescribe such regulations (including interim 
        final regulations) or other guidance as may be necessary or 
        appropriate to carry out the provisions of paragraphs (5), (7), 
        (8), (9), and (11).
            (11) Outreach.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary of Labor, in 
                consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
                Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall provide 
                outreach consisting of public education and enrollment 
                assistance relating to premium assistance provided 
                under this subsection. Such outreach shall target 
                employers, group health plan administrators, public 
                assistance programs, States, insurers, and other 
                entities as determined appropriate by such Secretaries. 
                Such outreach shall include an initial focus on those 
                individuals electing continuation coverage who are 
                referred to in paragraph (7)(C). Information on such 
                premium assistance, including enrollment, shall also be 
                made available on websites of the Departments of Labor, 
                Treasury, and Health and Human Services.
                    (B) Enrollment under medicare.--The Secretary of 
                Health and Human Services shall provide outreach 
                consisting of public education. Such outreach shall 
                target individuals who lose health insurance coverage. 
                Such outreach shall include information regarding 
                enrollment for benefits under title XVIII of the Social 
                Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) for purposes of 
                preventing mistaken delays of such enrollment by such 
                individuals, including lifetime penalties for failure 
                of timely enrollment.
            (12) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
                    (A) Administrator.--The term ``administrator'' has 
                the meaning given such term in section 3(16)(A) of the 
                Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
                    (B) COBRA continuation coverage.--The term ``COBRA 
                continuation coverage'' means continuation coverage 
                provided pursuant to part 6 of subtitle B of title I of 
                the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
                (other than under section 609), title XXII of the 
                Public Health Service Act, section 4980B of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (other than subsection 
                (f)(1) of such section insofar as it relates to 
                pediatric vaccines), or section 8905a of title 5, 
                United States Code, or under a State program that 
                provides comparable continuation coverage. Such term 
                does not include coverage under a health flexible 
                spending arrangement under a cafeteria plan within the 
                meaning of section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
                1986.
                    (C) COBRA continuation provision.--The term ``COBRA 
                continuation provision'' means the provisions of law 
                described in subparagraph (B).
                    (D) Covered employee.--The term ``covered 
                employee'' has the meaning given such term in section 
                607(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
                of 1974.
                    (E) Qualified beneficiary.--The term ``qualified 
                beneficiary'' has the meaning given such term in 
                section 607(3) of the Employee Retirement Income 
                Security Act of 1974.
                    (F) Group health plan.--The term ``group health 
                plan'' has the meaning given such term in section 
                607(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
                of 1974.
                    (G) State.--The term ``State'' includes the 
                District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
                the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the 
                Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
                    (H) Period of coverage.--Any reference in this 
                subsection to a period of coverage shall be treated as 
                a reference to a monthly or shorter period of coverage 
                with respect to which premiums are charged with respect 
                to such coverage.
                    (I) Plan sponsor.--The term ``plan sponsor'' has 
                the meaning given such term in section 3(16)(B) of the 
                Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
                    (J) Furlough period.--
                            (i) In general.--The term ``furlough 
                        period'' means, with respect to an individual 
                        and an employer of such individual, a period--
                                    (I) beginning with the first month 
                                beginning on or after March 1, 2020, 
                                and before January 31, 2021, during 
                                which such individual's employer 
                                reduces such individual's work hours 
                                (due to a lack of work, funds, or other 
                                nondisciplinary reason) to an amount 
                                that is less than 70 percent of the 
                                base month amount; and
                                    (II) ending with the earlier of--
                                            (aa) the first month 
                                        beginning after January 31, 
                                        2021; or
                                            (bb) the month following 
                                        the first month during which 
                                        work hours of such employee are 
                                        greater than 80 percent of work 
                                        hours of the base month amount.
                            (ii) Base month amount.--For purposes of 
                        clause (i), the term ``base month amount'' 
                        means, with respect to an individual and an 
                        employer of such individual, the greater of--
                                    (I) such individual's work hours in 
                                the month prior (or in the case such 
                                individual had no work hours in the 
                                month prior and had work hours in the 3 
                                months prior, the last month with work 
                                hours within the prior 3 months); and
                                    (II) such individual's work hours 
                                during the period beginning January 1, 
                                2020, and ending January 31, 2020.
            (13) Reports.--
                    (A) Interim report.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
                and the Secretary of Labor shall jointly submit an 
                interim report to the Committee on Education and Labor, 
                the Committee on Ways and Means, and the Committee on 
                Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and 
                the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions 
                and the Committee on Finance of the Senate regarding 
                the premium assistance provided under this subsection 
                that includes--
                            (i) the number of individuals provided such 
                        assistance as of the date of the report; and
                            (ii) the total amount of expenditures 
                        incurred (with administrative expenditures 
                        noted separately) in connection with such 
                        assistance as of the date of the report.
                    (B) Final report.--As soon as practicable after the 
                last period of COBRA continuation coverage for which 
                premium assistance is provided under this section, the 
                Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Labor 
                shall jointly submit a final report to each Committee 
                referred to in subparagraph (A) that includes--
                            (i) the number of individuals provided 
                        premium assistance under this section;
                            (ii) the average dollar amount (monthly and 
                        annually) of premium assistance provided to 
                        such individuals; and
                            (iii) the total amount of expenditures 
                        incurred (with administrative expenditures 
                        noted separately) in connection with premium 
                        assistance under this section.
            (14) COBRA premium assistance.--
                    (A) In general.--Subchapter B of chapter 65 of the 
                Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at 
                the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6432. CONTINUATION COVERAGE PREMIUM ASSISTANCE.

    ``(a) In General.--The person to whom premiums are payable for 
continuation coverage under section 2(a)(1) of the Worker Health 
Coverage Protection Act shall be allowed as a credit against the tax 
imposed by section 3111(a), or so much of the taxes imposed under 
section 3221(a) as are attributable to the rate in effect under section 
3111(a), for each calendar quarter an amount equal to the premiums not 
paid by assistance eligible individuals for such coverage by reason of 
such section 2(a)(1) with respect to such calendar quarter.
    ``(b) Person to Whom Premiums Are Payable.--For purposes of 
subsection (a), except as otherwise provided by the Secretary, the 
person to whom premiums are payable under such continuation coverage 
shall be treated as being--
            ``(1) in the case of any group health plan which is a 
        multiemployer plan (as defined in section 3(37) of the Employee 
        Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), the plan,
            ``(2) in the case of any group health plan not described in 
        paragraph (1)--
                    ``(A) which provides furlough continuation coverage 
                described in section 2(a)(1)(A)(ii) of the Worker 
                Health Coverage Protection Act or subject to the COBRA 
                continuation provisions contained in--
                            ``(i) this title,
                            ``(ii) the Employee Retirement Income 
                        Security Act of 1974,
                            ``(iii) the Public Health Service Act, or
                            ``(iv) title 5, United States Code, or
                    ``(B) under which some or all of the coverage is 
                not provided by insurance,
        the employer maintaining the plan, and
            ``(3) in the case of any group health plan not described in 
        paragraph (1) or (2), the insurer providing the coverage under 
        the group health plan.
    ``(c) Limitations and Refundability.--
            ``(1) Credit limited to certain employment taxes.--The 
        credit allowed by subsection (a) with respect to any calendar 
        quarter shall not exceed the tax imposed by section 3111(a), or 
        so much of the taxes imposed under section 3221(a) as are 
        attributable to the rate in effect under section 3111(a), for 
        such calendar quarter (reduced by any credits allowed under 
        subsections (e) and (f) of section 3111, sections 7001 and 7003 
        of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, section 2301 of 
        the CARES Act, and sections 20204 and 20212 of the COVID-19 Tax 
        Relief Act of 2020 for such quarter) on the wages paid with 
        respect to the employment of all employees of the employer.
            ``(2) Refundability of excess credit.--
                    ``(A) Credit is refundable.--If the amount of the 
                credit under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation of 
                paragraph (1) for any calendar quarter, such excess 
                shall be treated as an overpayment that shall be 
                refunded under sections 6402(a) and 6413(b).
                    ``(B) Credit may be advanced.--In anticipation of 
                the credit, including the refundable portion under 
                subparagraph (A), the credit may be advanced, according 
                to forms and instructions provided by the Secretary, up 
                to an amount calculated under subsection (a) through 
                the end of the most recent payroll period in the 
                quarter.
                    ``(C) Treatment of deposits.--The Secretary shall 
                waive any penalty under section 6656 for any failure to 
                make a deposit of the tax imposed by section 3111(a), 
                or so much of the taxes imposed under section 3221(a) 
                as are attributable to the rate in effect under section 
                3111(a), if the Secretary determines that such failure 
                was due to the anticipation of the credit allowed under 
                this section.
                    ``(D) Treatment of payments.--For purposes of 
                section 1324 of title 31, United States Code, any 
                amounts due to an employer under this paragraph shall 
                be treated in the same manner as a refund due from a 
                credit provision referred to in subsection (b)(2) of 
                such section.
            ``(3) Limitation on reimbursement for furloughed 
        employees.--In the case of an individual who for any month is 
        an assistance eligible individual described in section 
        2(a)(3)(B) of the Worker Health Coverage Protection Act with 
        respect to any coverage, the credit determined with respect to 
        such individual under subsection (a) for any such month ending 
        during a calendar quarter shall not exceed the amount of 
        premium the individual would have paid for a full month of such 
        coverage for the month preceding the first month for which an 
        individual is such an assistance eligible individual.
    ``(d) Governmental Entities.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `person' includes any governmental entity or Indian tribal 
government (as defined in section 139E(c)(1)).
    ``(e) Denial of Double Benefit.--For purposes of chapter 1, the 
gross income of any person allowed a credit under this section shall be 
increased for the taxable year which includes the last day of any 
calendar quarter with respect to which such credit is allowed by the 
amount of such credit. No amount for which a credit is allowed under 
this section shall be taken into account as qualified wages under 
section 2301 of the CARES Act or as qualified health plan expenses 
under section 7001(d) or 7003(d) of the Families First Coronavirus 
Response Act.
    ``(f) Reporting.--Each person entitled to reimbursement under 
subsection (a) for any period shall submit such reports (at such time 
and in such manner) as the Secretary may require, including--
            ``(1) an attestation of involuntary termination of 
        employment, reduction of hours, or furloughing, for each 
        assistance eligible individual on the basis of whose 
        termination, reduction of hours, or furloughing entitlement to 
        reimbursement is claimed under subsection (a),
            ``(2) a report of the amount of payroll taxes offset under 
        subsection (a) for the reporting period, and
            ``(3) a report containing the TINs of all covered 
        employees, the amount of subsidy reimbursed with respect to 
        each employee, and a designation with respect to each employee 
        as to whether the subsidy reimbursement is for coverage of 1 
        individual or 2 or more individuals.
    ``(g) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations or 
other guidance as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this 
section, including--
            ``(1) the requirement to report information or the 
        establishment of other methods for verifying the correct 
        amounts of reimbursements under this section,
            ``(2) the application of this section to group health plans 
        that are multiemployer plans (as defined in section 3(37) of 
        the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974),
            ``(3) to allow the advance payment of the credit determined 
        under subsection (a), subject to the limitations provided in 
        this section, based on such information as the Secretary shall 
        require,
            ``(4) to provide for the reconciliation of such advance 
        payment with the amount of the credit at the time of filing the 
        return of tax for the applicable quarter or taxable year, and
            ``(5) with respect to the application of the credit to 
        third party payors (including professional employer 
        organizations, certified professional employer organizations, 
        or agents under section 3504).''.
                    (B) Social security trust funds held harmless.--
                There are hereby appropriated to the Federal Old-Age 
                and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal 
                Disability Insurance Trust Fund established under 
                section 201 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401) 
                and the Social Security Equivalent Benefit Account 
                established under section 15A(a) of the Railroad 
                Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231n-1(a)) amounts 
                equal to the reduction in revenues to the Treasury by 
                reason of this section (without regard to this 
                subparagraph). Amounts appropriated by the preceding 
                sentence shall be transferred from the general fund at 
                such times and in such manner as to replicate to the 
                extent possible the transfers which would have occurred 
                to such Trust Fund or Account had this section not been 
                enacted.
                    (C) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for 
                subchapter B of chapter 65 of the Internal Revenue Code 
                of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following 
                new item:

``Sec. 6432. Continuation coverage premium assistance.''.
                    (D) Effective date.--The amendments made by this 
                paragraph shall apply to premiums to which paragraph 
                (1)(A) applies.
                    (E) Special rule in case of employee payment that 
                is not required under this section.--
                            (i) In general.--In the case of an 
                        assistance eligible individual who pays, with 
                        respect any period of coverage to which 
                        paragraph (1)(A) applies, the amount of the 
                        premium for such coverage that the individual 
                        would have (but for this Act) been required to 
                        pay, the person to whom such payment is payable 
                        shall reimburse such individual for the amount 
                        of such premium paid.
                            (ii) Credit of reimbursement.--A person to 
                        which clause (i) applies shall be allowed a 
                        credit in the manner provided under section 
                        6432 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for 
                        any payment made to the employee under such 
                        clause.
                            (iii) Payment of credits.--Any person to 
                        which clause (i) applies shall make the payment 
                        required under such clause to the individual 
                        not later than 60 days after the date on which 
                        such individual elects continuation coverage 
                        under paragraph (1).
            (15) Penalty for failure to notify health plan of cessation 
        of eligibility for premium assistance.--
                    (A) In general.--Part I of subchapter B of chapter 
                68 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by 
                adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 6720C. PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO NOTIFY HEALTH PLAN OF CESSATION OF 
              ELIGIBILITY FOR CONTINUATION COVERAGE PREMIUM ASSISTANCE.

    ``(a) In General.--Except in the case of failure described in 
subsection (b) or (c), any person required to notify a group health 
plan under section 2(a)(2)(B) of the Worker Health Coverage Protection 
Act who fails to make such a notification at such time and in such 
manner as the Secretary of Labor may require shall pay a penalty of 
$250.
    ``(b) Intentional Failure.--In the case of any such failure that is 
fraudulent, such person shall pay a penalty equal to the greater of--
            ``(1) $250, or
            ``(2) 110 percent of the premium assistance provided under 
        section 2(a)(1)(A) of such Act after termination of eligibility 
        under such section.
    ``(c) Reasonable Cause Exception.--No penalty shall be imposed 
under this section with respect to any failure if it is shown that such 
failure is due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect.''.
                    (B) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections of 
                part I of subchapter B of chapter 68 of such Code is 
                amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``Sec. 6720C. Penalty for failure to notify health plan of cessation of 
                            eligibility for continuation coverage 
                            premium assistance.''.
            (16) Coordination with hctc.--
                    (A) In general.--Section 35(g)(9) of the Internal 
                Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
            ``(9) Continuation coverage premium assistance.--In the 
        case of an assistance eligible individual who receives premium 
        assistance for continuation coverage under section 2(a)(1) of 
        the Worker Health Coverage Protection Act for any month during 
        the taxable year, such individual shall not be treated as an 
        eligible individual, a certified individual, or a qualifying 
        family member for purposes of this section or section 7527 with 
        respect to such month.''.
                    (B) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
                subparagraph (A) shall apply to taxable years ending 
                after the date of the enactment of this Act.
            (17) Exclusion of continuation coverage premium assistance 
        from gross income.--
                    (A) In general.--Part III of subchapter B of 
                chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
                amended by inserting after section 139H the following 
                new section:

``SEC. 139I. CONTINUATION COVERAGE PREMIUM ASSISTANCE.

    ``In the case of an assistance eligible individual (as defined in 
subsection (a)(3) of section 2 of the Worker Health Coverage Protection 
Act), gross income does not include any premium assistance provided 
under subsection (a)(1) of such section.''.
                    (B) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for 
                part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is 
                amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
                139H the following new item:

``Sec. 139I. Continuation coverage premium assistance.''.
                    (C) Effective date.--The amendments made by this 
                paragraph shall apply to taxable years ending after the 
                date of the enactment of this Act.
            (18) Deadlines with respect to notices.--Notwithstanding 
        section 518 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
        1974 (29 U.S.C. 1148) and section 7508A of the Internal Revenue 
        Code of 1986, the Secretary of Labor and the Secretary of the 
        Treasury, respectively, may not waive or extend any deadline 
        with respect to the provision of notices described in 
        paragraphs (7), (8), and (9).
    (b) Rule of Construction.--In all matters of interpretation, rules, 
and operational procedures, the language of this section shall be 
interpreted broadly for the benefit of workers and their families.

[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 4544 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>






117th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                S. 4544

  To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide health equity for 
                       people with disabilities.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                             July 18, 2022

  Mr. Casey (for himself, Mr. Kaine, Ms. Duckworth, and Mr. Merkley) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
          Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
  To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide health equity for 
                       people with disabilities.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Health Equity for People with 
Disabilities Act''.

SEC. 2. HEALTH EQUITY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.

    (a) In General.--Section 330 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 254b) is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
                    (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
                inserting ``including people with disabilities within 
                these populations;'' after ``public housing,''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``including 
                accessible healthcare services'' before the semicolon;
            (2) in subsection (b)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1)(A)--
                            (i) in clause (i), in the matter preceding 
                        subclause (I), by inserting ``, including 
                        accessible healthcare services'' after ``health 
                        services'';
                            (ii) in clause (iv), by inserting ``, 
                        including people with disabilities,'' after 
                        ``enable individuals''; and
                            (iii) in clause (v), by inserting ``, 
                        including people with disabilities,'' after 
                        ``health center''; and
                    (B) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(4) Disability.--The term `disability' has the meaning 
        given such term in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
        1990.'';
            (3) in subsection (c)(1)--
                    (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
                            (i) by inserting ``, including people with 
                        disabilities within these medically underserved 
                        populations'' before the first period; and
                            (ii) by inserting ``accessible'' after 
                        ``lease of''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (E), by inserting ``non-profit 
                health and wellness agencies,'' after ``local 
                hospitals,'';
            (4) in subsection (d)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by inserting ``or with 
                disabilities'' before the semicolon; and
                    (B) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or for 
                addressing barriers to care affecting people with 
                disabilities in their communities'' before the period;
            (5) in subsection (e)(6)(A)(ii), insert ``, or will serve a 
        significant population of people with disabilities'' after 
        ``other applicants'';
            (6) in subsection (f)(1)(B), by inserting ``, including 
        people with disabilities,'' after ``women and children'';
            (7) in subsection (g)(1)(A), by inserting ``, including 
        people with disabilities'' before the semicolon;
            (8) in subsection (h)(1), by striking ``and veterans at 
        risk of homelessness'' and inserting ``veterans at risk of 
        homelessness, and people with disabilities who are homeless or 
        at risk of homelessness'';
            (9) in subsection (i)(1), by inserting ``, inclusive of 
        people with disabilities in these communities'' before the 
        period; and
            (10) in subsection (j)(4)--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the 
                end;
                    (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period and 
                inserting ``; or''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(C) provide communication devices, aids, or 
                services to meet disability accessibility 
                requirements.''.
    (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in the amendments made by 
subsection (a) shall be construed to modify the manner in which funding 
is provided to targeted populations on the date of enactment of this 
Act or to otherwise shift the focus of programming for such 
populations. Such amendments are intended to ensure that members of 
targeted populations with disabilities are included in such 
programming, have access to care, and are served under programs under 
section 330 of the Public Health Service Act (as amended by this 
section).

[Congressional Bills 110th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 605 Introduced in Senate (IS)]







110th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                 S. 605

   To amend the Public Health Service Act to promote and improve the 
                       allied health professions.


_______________________________________________________________________


                   IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

                           February 15, 2007

 Ms. Cantwell (for herself, Mr. Bingaman, Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Kennedy, Ms. 
 Landrieu, Mr. Lieberman, Mrs. Lincoln, Ms. Mikulski, and Mrs. Murray) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
          Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
   To amend the Public Health Service Act to promote and improve the 
                       allied health professions.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Allied Health Reinvestment Act''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

    (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
            (1) The United States Census Bureau and other reports 
        highlight the increased demand for acute and chronic health 
        care services among both the general population and a rapidly 
        growing aging portion of the population.
            (2) The calls for reduction in medical errors, increased 
        patient safety, and quality of care have resulted in an 
        amplified call for allied health professionals to provide 
        health care services.
            (3) Several allied health professions are characterized by 
        workforce shortages, declining enrollments in allied health 
        education programs, or a combination of both factors, and 
        hospital officials have reported vacancy rates in positions 
        occupied by allied health professionals.
            (4) Many allied health education programs are facing 
        significant economic pressure that could force their closure 
        due to an insufficient number of students.
    (b) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide incentives 
for individuals to seek and complete high quality allied health 
education and training and provide additional funding to ensure that 
such education and training can be provided to allied health students 
so that the United States health care industry with have a supply of 
allied health professionals needed to support the health care system of 
the United States in this decade and beyond.

SEC. 3. AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

    Title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:

                 ``PART G--ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

``SEC. 799C. DEFINITIONS.

    ``In this part:
            ``(1) Allied health education program.--The term `allied 
        health education program' means any postsecondary educational 
        program offered by an institution accredited by an agency or 
        commission recognized by the Department of Education, or 
        leading to a State certificate or license or any other 
        educational program approved by the Secretary. Such term 
        includes colleges, universities, or schools of allied health 
        and equivalent entities that include programs leading to a 
        certificate, associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level degree 
        in an allied health profession.
            ``(2) Allied health professions.--The term `allied health 
        professions' includes professions in the following areas at the 
        certificate, associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level:
                    ``(A) Dental hygiene.
                    ``(B) Dietetics or nutrition.
                    ``(C) Emergency medical services.
                    ``(D) Health information management.
                    ``(E) Clinical laboratory sciences and medical 
                technology.
                    ``(F) Cytotechnology.
                    ``(G) Occupational therapy.
                    ``(H) Physical therapy.
                    ``(I) Radiologic technology.
                    ``(J) Nuclear medical technology.
                    ``(K) Rehabilitation counseling.
                    ``(L) Respiratory therapy.
                    ``(M) Speech-language pathology and audiology.
                    ``(N) Any other profession determined appropriate 
                by the Secretary.
            ``(3) Health care facility.--The term `health care 
        facility' means an outpatient health care facility, hospital, 
        nursing home, home health care agency, hospice, federally 
        qualified health center, nurse managed health center, rural 
        health clinic, public health clinic, or any similar health care 
        facility or practice that employs allied health professionals.

``SEC. 799C-1. PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS.

    ``The Secretary shall develop and issue public service 
announcements that shall--
            ``(1) advertise and promote the allied health professions;
            ``(2) highlight the advantages and rewards of the allied 
        health professions; and
            ``(3) encourage individuals from diverse communities and 
        backgrounds to enter the allied health professions.

``SEC. 799C-2. STATE AND LOCAL PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to designated 
eligible entities to support State and local advertising campaigns that 
are conducted through appropriate media outlets (as determined by the 
Secretary) to--
            ``(1) promote the allied health professions;
            ``(2) highlight the advantages and rewards of the allied 
        health professions; and
            ``(3) encourage individuals from disadvantaged communities 
        and backgrounds to enter the allied health professions.
    ``(b) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a professional, national, or State allied health 
        association, State health care provider, or association of one 
        or more health care facilities, allied health education 
        programs, or other entities that provides similar services or 
        serves a like function; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.

``SEC. 799C-3. ALLIED HEALTH RECRUITMENT GRANT PROGRAM.

    ``(a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
eligible entities to increase allied health professions education 
opportunities.
    ``(b) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a professional, national, or State allied health 
        association, State health care provider, or association of one 
        or more health care facilities, allied health education 
        programs, or other eligible entities that provides similar 
        services or serves a like function; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--An entity shall use amounts received under a 
grant under subsection (a) to--
            ``(1) support outreach programs at elementary and secondary 
        schools that inform guidance counselors and students of 
        education opportunities regarding the allied health 
        professions;
            ``(2) carry out special projects to increase allied health 
        education opportunities for individuals who are from 
        disadvantaged backgrounds (including racial and ethnic 
        minorities that are underrepresented among the allied health 
        professions) by providing student scholarships or stipends, 
        pre-entry preparation, and retention activities;
            ``(3) provide assistance to public and nonprofit private 
        educational institutions to support remedial education programs 
        for allied health students who require assistance with math, 
        science, English, and medical terminology;
            ``(4) meet the costs of child care and transportation for 
        individuals who are taking part in an allied health education 
        program at any level; and
            ``(5) support community-based partnerships seeking to 
        recruit allied health professionals in rural communities and 
        medically underserved urban communities, and other communities 
        experiencing an allied health professions shortage.

``SEC. 799C-4. GRANTS FOR HEALTH CAREER ACADEMIES.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities to assist such entities in collaborating to carry out programs 
that form education pipelines to facilitate the entry of students of 
secondary educational institutions, especially underrepresented racial 
and ethnic minorities, into careers in the allied health professions.
    ``(b) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), an entity shall--
            ``(1) be an institution that offers allied health education 
        programs, a health care facility, or a secondary educational 
        institution; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.

``SEC. 799C-5. ALLIED HEALTH EDUCATION, PRACTICE, AND RETENTION GRANTS.

    ``(a) Education Priority Areas.--The Secretary may award grants to 
or enter into contracts with eligible entities to--
            ``(1) expand the enrollment of individuals in allied health 
        education programs, especially the enrollment of 
        underrepresented racial and ethnic minority students; and
            ``(2) provide education through new technologies and 
        methods, including distance-learning methodologies.
    ``(b) Practice Priority Areas.--The Secretary may award grants to 
or enter into contracts with eligible entities to--
            ``(1) establish or expand allied health practice 
        arrangements in noninstitutional settings to demonstrate 
        methods to improve access to primary health care in rural areas 
        and other medically underserved communities;
            ``(2) provide care for underserved populations and other 
        high-risk groups such as the elderly, individuals with HIV/
        AIDS, substance abusers, the homeless, and victims of domestic 
        violence;
            ``(3) provide managed care, information management, quality 
        improvement, and other skills needed to practice in existing 
        and emerging organized health care systems; or
            ``(4) develop generational and cultural competencies among 
        allied health professionals.
    ``(c) Retention Priority Areas.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may award grants to and 
        enter into contracts with eligible entities to enhance the 
        allied health professions workforce by initiating and 
        maintaining allied health retention programs described in 
        paragraph (2) or (3).
            ``(2) Grants for career ladder programs.--The Secretary may 
        award grants to and enter into contracts with eligible entities 
        for programs--
                    ``(A) to promote career advancement for allied 
                health personnel in a variety of training settings, 
                cross training or specialty training among diverse 
                population groups, and the advancement of individuals; 
                and
                    ``(B) to assist individuals in obtaining the 
                education and training required to enter the allied 
                health professions and advance within such professions, 
                such as by providing career counseling and mentoring.
            ``(3) Enhancing patient care delivery systems.--
                    ``(A) Grants.--The Secretary may award grants to 
                eligible entities to improve the retention of allied 
                health professionals and to enhance patient care that 
                is directly related to allied health activities by 
                enhancing collaboration and communication among allied 
                health professionals and other health care 
                professionals, and by promoting allied health 
                involvement in the organizational and clinical 
                decision-making processes of a health care facility.
                    ``(B) Preference.--In making awards of grants under 
                this paragraph, the Secretary shall give preferences to 
                applicants that have not previously received an award 
                under this paragraph and to applicants from rural, 
                underserved areas.
                    ``(C) Continuation of an award.--The Secretary 
                shall make continuation of any award under this 
                paragraph beyond the second year of such award 
                contingent on the recipient of such award having 
                demonstrated to the Secretary measurable and 
                substantive improvement in allied health personnel 
                retention or patient care.
    ``(d) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a health care facility, or any partnership or 
        coalition containing a health care facility or allied health 
        education program; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.

``SEC. 799C-6. DEVELOPING MODELS AND BEST PRACTICES PROGRAM.

    ``(a) Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities to enable such entities to carry out demonstration programs 
using models and best practices in allied health for the purpose of 
developing innovative strategies or approaches for the retention of 
allied health professionals.
    ``(b) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a health care facility, or any partnership or 
        coalition containing a health care facility or allied health 
        education program; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Distribution of Grants.--In awarding grants under this 
section, the Secretary shall ensure that grantees represent a variety 
of geographic regions and a range of different types and sizes of 
facilities, including facilities located in rural, urban, and suburban 
areas.
    ``(d) Use of Funds.--An entity shall use amounts received under a 
grant under this section to carry out demonstration programs of models 
and best practices in allied health for the purpose of--
            ``(1) promoting retention and satisfaction of allied health 
        professionals;
            ``(2) promoting opportunities for allied health 
        professionals to pursue education, career advancement, and 
        organizational recognition; and
            ``(3) developing continuing education programs that 
        instruct allied health professionals in how to use emerging 
        medical technologies and how to address current and future 
        health care needs.
    ``(e) Area Health Education Centers.--The Secretary shall award 
grants to area health education centers to enable such centers to enter 
into contracts with allied health education programs to expand the 
operation of area health education centers to work in communities to 
develop models of excellence for allied health professionals or to 
expand any junior and senior high school mentoring programs to include 
an allied health professions mentoring program.

``SEC. 799C-7. ALLIED HEALTH FACULTY LOAN PROGRAM.

    ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, may 
enter into an agreement with any institution offering an eligible 
allied health education program for the establishment and operation of 
a faculty loan fund in accordance with this section (referred to in 
this section as the `loan fund'), to increase the number of qualified 
allied health faculty.
    ``(b) Agreements.--Each agreement entered into under this section 
shall--
            ``(1) provide for the establishment of a loan fund by the 
        institution offering the allied health education program 
        involved;
            ``(2) provide for deposit in the loan fund of--
                    ``(A) the Federal capital contributions to the 
                fund;
                    ``(B) an amount provided by the institution 
                involved which shall be equal to not less than one-
                ninth of the amount of the Federal capital contribution 
                under subparagraph (A);
                    ``(C) any collections of principal and interest on 
                loans made from the fund; and
                    ``(D) any other earnings of the fund;
            ``(3) provide that the loan fund will be used only for the 
        provision of loans to faculty of the allied health education 
        program in accordance with subsection (c) and for the costs of 
        the collection of such loans and the interest thereon;
            ``(4) provide that loans may be made from such fund only to 
        faculty who are pursuing a full-time course of study or, at the 
        discretion of the Secretary, a part-time course of study in an 
        advanced degree program; and
            ``(5) contain such other provisions determined appropriate 
        by the Secretary to protect the financial interests of the 
        United States.
    ``(c) Loan Provisions.--Loans from any faculty loan fund 
established pursuant to an agreement under this section shall be made 
to an individual on such terms and conditions as the allied health 
education program may determine, except that--
            ``(1) such terms and conditions are subject to any 
        conditions, limitations, and requirements prescribed by the 
        Secretary;
            ``(2) in the case of any individual, the total of the loans 
        for any academic year made by an allied health education 
        program from loan funds established pursuant to agreements 
        under this section may not exceed $30,000, plus any amount 
        determined by the Secretary on an annual basis to reflect 
        inflation;
            ``(3) upon completion by the individual of each of the 
        first, second, and third year of full-time employment, as 
        required under the loan agreement, as a faculty member in an 
        allied health education program, the program shall cancel 20 
        percent of the principal and interest due on the amount of the 
        unpaid portion of the loan on the first day of such employment;
            ``(4) upon completion by the individual of the fourth year 
        of full-time employment, as required under the loan agreement, 
        as a faculty member in an allied health education program, the 
        program shall cancel 25 percent of the principal and interest 
        due on the amount of the unpaid portion of the loan on the 
        first day of such employment;
            ``(5) the loan may be used to pay the cost of tuition, 
        fees, books, laboratory expenses, and other reasonable 
        education expenses;
            ``(6) the loan shall be repayable in equal or graduated 
        periodic installments (with the right of the borrower to 
        accelerate repayment) over the 10-year period that begins 9 
        months after the individual ceases to pursue a course of study 
        in an allied health education program; and
            ``(7) such loan shall--
                    ``(A) beginning on the date that is 3 months after 
                the individual ceases to pursue a course of study in an 
                allied health education program, bear interest on the 
                unpaid balance of the loan at the rate of 3 percent per 
                year; or
                    ``(B) subject to subsection (e), if the allied 
                health education program determines that the individual 
                will not complete such course of study or serve as a 
                faculty member as required under the loan agreement 
                under this subsection, bear interest on the unpaid 
                balance of the loan at the prevailing market rate.
    ``(d) Payment of Proportionate Share.--Where all or any part of a 
loan (including interest thereon) is canceled under this section, the 
Secretary shall pay to the allied health education program involved an 
amount equal to the program's proportionate share of the canceled 
portion, as determined by the Secretary.
    ``(e) Review by Secretary.--At the request of the individual 
involved, the Secretary may review any determination by an allied 
health education program under this section.

``SEC. 799C-8. SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM FOR SERVICE IN RURAL AND OTHER 
              MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.

    ``(a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall establish a 
scholarship program (referred to in this section as the `program') to 
provide scholarships to individuals seeking allied health education who 
agree to provide service in rural and other medically underserved areas 
with allied health personnel shortages.
    ``(b) Preference.--In awarding scholarships under this section, the 
Secretary shall give preference to--
            ``(1) applicants who demonstrate the greatest financial 
        need;
            ``(2) applicants who agree to serve in health care 
        facilities experiencing allied health shortages in rural and 
        other medically underserved areas;
            ``(3) applicants who are currently working in a health care 
        facility who agree to serve the period of obligated service at 
        such facility;
            ``(4) minority applicants; and
            ``(5) applicants with an interest in a practice area of 
        allied health that has unmet needs.
    ``(c) Program Requirements.--
            ``(1) Contracts.--Under the program, the Secretary shall 
        enter into contracts with eligible individuals under which such 
        individuals agree to serve as allied health professionals for a 
        period of not less than 2 years at a health care facility with 
        a critical shortage of allied health professionals in 
        consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to provide to 
        the individuals scholarships for attendance in an allied health 
        education program.
            ``(2) Eligible individuals.--In this subsection, the term 
        `eligible individual' means an individual who is enrolled or 
        accepted for enrollment as a full-time or part-time student in 
        an allied health education program.
            ``(3) Service requirement.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may not enter into 
                a contract with an eligible individual under this 
                section unless the individual agrees to serve as an 
                allied health professional at a health care facility 
                with a critical shortage of allied health professionals 
                for a period of full-time service of not less than 2 
                years, or for a period of part-time service in 
                accordance with subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Part-time service.--An individual may 
                complete the period of service described in 
                subparagraph (A) on a part-time basis if the individual 
                has a written agreement that--
                            ``(i) is entered into by the facility and 
                        the individual and is approved by the 
                        Secretary; and
                            ``(ii) provides that the period of 
                        obligated service will be extended so that the 
                        aggregate amount of service performed will 
                        equal the amount of service that would be 
                        performed through a period of full-time service 
                        of not less than 2 years.
    ``(d) Reports.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this part, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report 
describing the program carried out under this section, including 
statements regarding--
            ``(1) the number of enrollees by specialty or discipline, 
        scholarships, and grant recipients;
            ``(2) the number of graduates;
            ``(3) the amount of scholarship payments made;
            ``(4) which educational institution the recipients 
        attended;
            ``(5) the number and placement location of the scholarship 
        recipients at health care facilities with a critical shortage 
        of allied health professionals;
            ``(6) the default rate and actions required;
            ``(7) the amount of outstanding default funds of the 
        scholarship program;
            ``(8) to the extent that it can be determined, the reason 
        for the default;
            ``(9) the demographics of the individuals participating in 
        the scholarship program; and
            ``(10) an evaluation of the overall costs and benefits of 
        the program.

``SEC. 799C-9. GRANTS FOR CLINICAL EDUCATION, INTERNSHIP, AND RESIDENCY 
              PROGRAMS.

    ``(a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
eligible entities to develop clinical education, internship, and 
residency programs that encourage mentoring and the development of 
specialties.
    ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible for a grant under this 
section an entity shall--
            ``(1) be a partnership of an allied health education 
        program and a health care facility; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--An eligible entity shall use amounts received 
under a grant under this section to--
            ``(1) develop clinical education, internship, and residency 
        programs and curriculum and training programs for graduates of 
        an allied health education program;
            ``(2) provide support for faculty and mentors; and
            ``(3) provide support for allied health professionals 
        participating in clinical education, internship, and residency 
        programs on both a full-time and part-time basis.

``SEC. 799C-10. GRANTS FOR PARTNERSHIPS.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible 
entities to enable such entities to form partnerships to carry out the 
activities described in this section.
    ``(b) Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, and entity shall--
            ``(1) be a partnership between an allied health education 
        program and a health care facility; and
            ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
        such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
        the Secretary may require.
    ``(c) Use of Funds.--An eligible entity shall use amounts received 
under a grant under this section to--
            ``(1) provide employees of the health care facility that is 
        a member of the partnership involved advanced training and 
        education in a allied health education program;
            ``(2) establish or expand allied health practice 
        arrangements in non-institutional settings to demonstrate 
        methods to improve access to health care in rural and other 
        medically underserved communities;
            ``(3) purchase distance learning technology to extend 
        general education and training programs to rural areas, and to 
        extend specialty education and training programs to all areas; 
        and
            ``(4) establish or expand mentoring, clinical education, 
        and internship programs for training in specialty care areas.

``SEC. 799C-11. ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS TRAINING FOR DIVERSITY.

    ``The Secretary, acting in conjunction with allied health 
professional associations, shall develop a system for collecting and 
analyzing allied health workforce data gathered by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, the Health Resources and Services Administration, other 
entities within the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
Department of Veterans Affairs, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services, the Department of Defense, allied health professional 
associations, and regional centers for health workforce studies to 
determine educational pipeline and practitioner shortages, and project 
future needs for such a workforce.

``SEC. 799C-12. ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS TRAINING FOR DIVERSITY.

    ``The Secretary shall include schools of allied health among the 
health professions schools that are eligible to receive grants under 
this part for the purpose of assisting such schools in supporting 
Centers of Excellence in health professions education for under-
represented minority individuals.

``SEC. 799C-13. REPORTS BY GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.

    ``Not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this part, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an 
evaluation of whether the programs carried out under this part have 
demonstrably increased the number of applicants to allied health 
education programs and prepare and submit to the appropriate committees 
of Congress a report concerning the results of such evaluation.

``SEC. 799C-14. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, 
such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2008 through 
2013.''.

[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 4365 Introduced in House (IH)]







106th CONGRESS
  2d Session
                                H. R. 4365

   To amend the Public Health Service Act with respect to children's 
                                health.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                              May 3, 2000

   Mr. Bilirakis (for himself and Mr. Brown of Ohio) introduced the 
    following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Commerce

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL


 
   To amend the Public Health Service Act with respect to children's 
                                health.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Health Act of 2000''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

    The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
                            TITLE I--AUTISM

Subtitle A--Surveillance and Research Regarding Prevalence and Pattern 
                               of Autism

Sec. 101. Short title.
Sec. 102. Surveillance and research programs; clearinghouse; advisory 
                            committee.
  Subtitle B--Expansion, Intensification, and Coordination of Autism 
              Activities of National Institutes of Health

Sec. 111. Short title.
Sec. 112. Expansion, intensification, and coordination; information and 
                            education; interagency coordinating 
                            committee.
              TITLE II--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGARDING
                               FRAGILE X

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; 
                            research on fragile X.
Sec. 203. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; 
                            loan repayment program regarding research 
                            on fragile X.
          TITLE III--JUVENILE ARTHRITIS AND RELATED CONDITIONS

Sec. 301. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
                            Diseases; research on juvenile arthritis 
                            and related conditions.
Sec. 302. Information clearinghouse.
     TITLE IV--REDUCING BURDEN OF DIABETES AMONG CHILDREN AND YOUTH

Sec. 401. Programs of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Sec. 402. Programs of National Institutes of Health.
            TITLE V--ASTHMA TREATMENT SERVICES FOR CHILDREN

Sec. 501. Short title.
                     Subtitle A--Treatment Services

Sec. 511. Grants for children's asthma relief.
Sec. 512. Technical and conforming amendments.
                   Subtitle B--Prevention Activities

Sec. 521. Preventive health and health services block grant; systems 
                            for reducing asthma-related illnesses 
                            through urban cockroach management.
             Subtitle C--Coordination of Federal Activities

Sec. 531. Coordination through National Institutes of Health.
                    Subtitle D--Compilation of Data

Sec. 541. Compilation of data by Centers for Disease Control and 
                            Prevention.
             TITLE VI--BIRTH DEFECTS PREVENTION ACTIVITIES

                    Subtitle A--Folic Acid Promotion

Sec. 601. Short title.
Sec. 602. Program regarding effects of folic acid in prevention of 
                            birth defects.
    Subtitle B--National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
                              Disabilities

Sec. 611. National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
                            Disabilities.
TITLE VII--EARLY DETECTION, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT REGARDING HEARING 
                            LOSS IN INFANTS

Sec. 701. Short title.
Sec. 702. Purposes.
Sec. 703. Programs of Health Resources and Services Administration, 
                            Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
                            and National Institutes of Health.
                   TITLE VIII--CHILDREN AND EPILEPSY

Sec. 801. National public health campaign on epilepsy; seizure disorder 
                            demonstration projects in medically 
                            underserved areas.
           TITLE IX--SAFE MOTHERHOOD; INFANT HEALTH PROMOTION

     Subtitle A--Safe Motherhood Monitoring and Prevention Research

Sec. 901. Short title.
Sec. 902. Monitoring; prevention research and other activities.
       Subtitle B--Pregnant Mothers and Infants Health Promotion

Sec. 911. Short title.
Sec. 912. Programs regarding prenatal and postnatal health.
          TITLE X--REVISION AND EXTENSION OF CERTAIN PROGRAMS

               Subtitle A--Pediatric Research Initiative

Sec. 1001. Short title.
Sec. 1002. Establishment of pediatric research initiative.
Sec. 1003. Investment in tomorrow's pediatric researchers.
                       Subtitle B--Other Programs

Sec. 1011. Childhood immunizations.
Sec. 1012. Screenings, referrals, and education regarding lead 
                            poisoning.
               TITLE XI--CHILDHOOD SKELETAL MALIGNANCIES

Sec. 1101. Programs of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
                            National Institutes of Health.
                     TITLE XII--ADOPTION AWARENESS

                 Subtitle A--Infant Adoption Awareness

Sec. 1201. Short title.
Sec. 1202. Grants regarding infant adoption awareness.
              Subtitle B--Special Needs Adoption Awareness

Sec. 1211. Short title.
Sec. 1212. Special needs adoption programs; public awareness campaign 
                            and other activities.
                   TITLE XIII--TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

Sec. 1301. Short title.
Sec. 1302. Programs of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Sec. 1303. Programs of National Institutes of Health.
Sec. 1304. Programs of Health Resources and Services Administration.
             TITLE XIV--PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INJURIES

Sec. 1401. Authorization of Appropriations for programs of Centers for 
                            Disease Control and Prevention.
                   TITLE XV--HEALTHY START INITIATIVE

Sec. 1501. Short title.
Sec. 1502. Continuation of healthy start program.
        TITLE XVI--ORAL HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION

Sec. 1601. Oral health promotion and disease prevention.
                TITLE XVII--VACCINE COMPENSATION PROGRAM

Sec. 1701. Short title.
Sec. 1702. Content of petitions.
                        TITLE XVIII--HEPATITIS C

Sec. 1801. Short title.
Sec. 1802. Surveillance and education regarding hepatitis C.
            TITLE XIX--NIH INITIATIVE ON AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES

Sec. 1901. Short title.
Sec. 1902. Juvenile diabetes, juvenile arthritis, lupus, multiple 
                            sclerosis, and other autoimmune-diseases; 
                            initiative through Directior of National 
                            Institutes of Health.
 TITLE XX--GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS IN CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS

Sec. 2001. Extension of authorization of appropriations.
  TITLE XXI--SPECIAL NEEDS OF CHILDREN REGARDING ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION

Sec. 2101. Short title.
Sec. 2102. Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network; amendments
                            regarding needs of children.
                  TITLE XXII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 2201. Report regarding research on rare diseases in children.
                      TITLE XXIII--EFFECTIVE DATE

Sec. 2301. Effective date.

                            TITLE I--AUTISM

Subtitle A--Surveillance and Research Regarding Prevalence and Pattern 
                               of Autism

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Autism Statistics, 
Surveillance, Research, and Epidemiology Act of 2000 (ASSURE)''.

SEC. 102. SURVEILLANCE AND RESEARCH PROGRAMS; CLEARINGHOUSE; ADVISORY 
              COMMITTEE.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 317G the following 
section:

      ``surveillance and research regarding autism and pervasive 
                        developmental disorders

    ``Sec. 317H. (a) In General.--The Secretary , acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make 
awards of grants and cooperative agreements for the collection, 
analysis, and reporting of data on autism and pervasive developmental 
disorders. An entity may receive such an award only if the entity is a 
public or nonprofit private entity ``(including health departments of 
States and political subdivisions of States, and including universities 
and other educational entities). In making such awards, the Secretary 
may provide direct technical assistance in lieu of cash.
    ``(b) Centers of Excellence in Autism and Pervasive Developmental 
Disorders Epidemiology.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
        shall (subject to the extent of amounts made available in 
        appropriations Acts) establish not less than three, and not 
        more than five, regional centers of excellence in autism and 
        pervasive developmental disorders epidemiology for the purpose 
        of collecting and analyzing information on the number, 
        incidence, correlates, and causes of autism and related 
        developmental disorders.
            ``(2) Recipients of awards for establishment of centers.--
        Centers under paragraph (1) shall be established and operated 
        through the award of grants or cooperative agreements to public 
        or nonprofit private entities that conduct research, including 
        health departments of States and political subdivisions of 
        States, and including universities and other educational 
        entities.
            ``(3) Certain requirements.--An award for a center under 
        paragraph (1) may be made only if the entity involved submits 
        to the Secretary an application containing such agreements and 
        information as the Secretary may require, including an 
        agreement that the center involved will operate in accordance 
        with the following:
                    ``(A) The center will collect, analyze, and report 
                autism and pervasive developmental disorders data 
                according to guidelines prescribed by the Director, 
                after consultation with relevant State and local public 
                health officials, private sector developmental disorder 
                researchers, and advocates for those with developmental 
                disorders;
                    ``(B) The center will assist with the development 
                and coordination of State autism and pervasive 
                developmental disorders surveillance efforts within a 
                region;
                    ``(C) The center will provide education, training, 
                and clinical skills improvement for health 
                professionals aimed at better understanding and 
                treatment of autism and related developmental 
                disorders; and
                    ``(D) The center will identify eligible cases and 
                controls through its surveillance systems and conduct 
                research into factors which may cause autism and 
                related developmental disorders; each program will 
                develop or extend an area of special research expertise 
                (including, but not limited to, genetics, environmental 
                exposure to contaminants, immunology, and other 
                relevant research specialty areas).
    ``(c) Clearinghouse.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out the 
following:
            ``(1) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall 
        serve as the coordinating agency for autism and pervasive 
        developmental disorders surveillance activities through the 
        establishment of a clearinghouse for the collection and storage 
        of data generated from the monitoring programs created by this 
        section. The functions of such a clearinghouse shall include 
        facilitating the coordination of research and policy 
        development relating to the epidemiology of autism and other 
        pervasive developmental disorders.
            ``(2) The Secretary shall coordinate the Federal response 
        to requests for assistance from State health department 
        officials regarding potential or alleged autism or 
        developmental disorder clusters.
    ``(d) Advisory Committee.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        Advisory Committee for Autism and Pervasive developmental 
        disorders Epidemiology Research (in this section referred to as 
        the `Committee'). The Committee shall provide advice and 
        recommendations to the Director of the Centers for Disease 
        Control and Prevention on--
                    ``(A) the establishment of a national autism and 
                pervasive developmental disorders surveillance program;
                    ``(B) the establishment of centers of excellence in 
                autism and pervasive developmental disorders 
                epidemiology;
                    ``(C) methods and procedures to more effectively 
                coordinate government and non-government programs and 
                research on autism and pervasive developmental 
disorders epidemiology; and
                    ``(D) the effective operation of autism and 
                pervasive developmental disorders epidemiology research 
                activities.
            ``(2) Composition.--
                    ``(A) In general.--The Committee shall be composed 
                of ex officio members in accordance with subparagraph 
                (B) and 11 appointed members in accordance with 
                subparagraph (C).
                    ``(B) Ex officio members.--The following officials 
                shall serve as ex officio members of the Committee:
                            ``(i) The Director of the National Center 
                        for Environmental Health.
                            ``(ii) The Assistant Administrator of the 
                        Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
                        Registry.
                            ``(iii) The Director of the National 
                        Institute of Child Health and Human 
                        Development.
                            ``(iv) The Director of the National 
                        Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
                    ``(C) Appointed members.--Appointments to the 
                Committee shall be made in accordance with the 
                following:
                            ``(i) Two members shall be research 
                        scientists with demonstrated achievements in 
                        research related to autism and related 
                        developmental disorders. The scientists shall 
                        be appointed by the Secretary in consultation 
                        with the National Academy of Sciences.
                            ``(ii) Five members shall be 
                        representatives of the five national 
                        organizations whose primary emphasis is on 
                        research into autism and other pervasive 
                        developmental disorders. One representative 
                        from each of such organizations shall be 
                        appointed by the Secretary in consultation with 
                        the National Academy of Sciences.
                            ``(iii) Two members shall be clinicians 
                        whose practice is primarily devoted to the 
                        treatment of individuals with autism and other 
                        pervasive developmental disorders. The 
                        clinicians shall be appointed by the Secretary 
                        in consultation with the Institute of Medicine 
                        and the National Academy of Sciences.
                            ``(iv) Two members shall be individuals who 
                        are the parents or legal guardians of a person 
                        or persons with autism or other pervasive 
                        developmental disorders. The individuals shall 
                        be appointed by the Secretary in consultation 
                        with the ex officio members under subparagraph 
                        (B) and the five national organizations 
                        referred to in clause (ii).
            ``(3) Administrative support; terms of service; other 
        provisions.--The following apply with respect to the Committee:
                    ``(A) The Committee shall receive necessary and 
                appropriate administrative support from the Department 
                of Health and Human Services.
                    ``(B) Members of the Committee shall be appointed 
                for a term of three years, and may serve for an 
                unlimited number of terms if reappointed.
                    ``(C) The Committee shall meet no less than two 
                times per year.
                    ``(D) Members of the Committee shall not receive 
                additional compensation for their service. Such members 
                may receive reimbursement for appropriate and 
                additional expenses that are incurred through service 
                on the Committee which would not have incurred had they 
                not been a member of the Committee.
    ``(e) Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit 
to the Congress, after consultation with and comment by the advisory 
committee under subsection (d), an annual report regarding the 
prevalence and incidence of autism and other pervasive developmental 
disorders, the results of research into the etiology of autism and 
other pervasive developmental disorders, public health responses to 
known or preventable causes of autism and other pervasive developmental 
disorders, and the need for additional research into promising lines of 
scientific inquiry.
    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

  Subtitle B--Expansion, Intensification, and Coordination of Autism 
   Activities of National Institutes of Health With Respect to Autism

SEC. 111. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Advancement in Pediatric Autism 
Research Act of 2000''.

SEC. 112. EXPANSION, INTENSIFICATION, AND COORDINATION; INFORMATION AND 
              EDUCATION; INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE.

    Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following section:

                                ``autism

    ``Sec. 409C. (a) In General.--
            ``(1) Expansion of activities.--The Director of NIH (in 
        this section referred to as the `Director') shall expand, 
        intensify, and coordinate the activities of the National 
        Institutes of Health with respect to research on autism.
            ``(2) Administration of program; collaboration among 
        agencies.--The Director shall carry out this section (other 
        than subsection (b)) acting through the Director of the 
        National Institute of Mental Health and in collaboration with 
any other agencies that the Director determines appropriate.
    ``(b) Interagency Coordinating Committee.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that there is 
        in operation an interagency committee to be known as the 
        `Autism Coordinating Committee' (referred to in this subsection 
        as the `Committee') to coordinate all efforts within the 
        Department of Health and Human Services concerning autism, 
        including activities carried out through the National 
        Institutes of Health under this section and activities carried 
        out through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
        under section 317H.
            ``(2) Membership.--The Committee shall be composed of such 
        directors of the national research institutes, such directors 
        of centers within the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention, and such other officials within the Department of 
        Health and Human Services as the Secretary determines to be 
        appropriate. The Committee may include representatives of other 
        Federal agencies that serve children with autism, such as the 
        Department of Education.
            ``(3) Meetings.--The Committee shall meet not less than 
        twice per year.
    ``(c) Centers of Excellence.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director shall under subsection 
        (a)(1) make awards of grants and contracts to public or 
        nonprofit private entities to pay all or part of the cost of 
        planning, establishing, improving, and providing basic 
        operating support for centers of excellence regarding research 
        on autism.
            ``(2) Research.--Each center under paragraph (1) shall 
        conduct basic and clinical research into autism. Such research 
        should include investigations into the cause, diagnosis, early 
        detection, prevention, control, and treatment of autism. These 
        centers, as a group, shall conduct research including but not 
        limited to the fields of developmental neurobiology, genetics, 
        and psychopharmacology.
            ``(3) Services for patients.--A center under paragraph (1) 
        may expend amounts provided under such paragraph to carry out a 
        program to make individuals aware of opportunities to 
        participate as subjects in research conducted by the centers. 
        The program may, in accordance with such criteria as the 
        Director may establish, provide to such subjects referrals for 
        health and other services, and such patient care costs as are 
        required for research. The extent to which the center can 
        demonstrate availability and access to clinical services shall 
        be considered by the Director in decisions about awarding the 
        grants to applicants which meet the scientific criteria for 
        funding.
            ``(4) Coordination of centers; reports.--The Director 
        shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of 
        information among centers under paragraph (1) and ensure 
        regular communication between such centers, and may require the 
        periodic preparation of reports on the activities of the 
        centers and the submission of the reports to the Director.
            ``(5) Organization of centers.--Each center under paragraph 
        (1) shall use the facilities of a single institution, or be 
        formed from a consortium of cooperating institutions, meeting 
        such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director.
            ``(6) Number of centers; duration of support.--The Director 
        shall provide for the establishment of not less than five 
        centers under paragraph (1), subject to the extent of amounts 
        made available in appropriations Acts. Support of such a center 
        may be for a period not exceeding 5 years. Such period may be 
        extended for one or more additional periods not exceeding 5 
        years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an 
        appropriate technical and scientific peer review group 
        established by the Director and if such group has recommended 
        to the Director that such period should be extended.
    ``(d) Facilitation of Research.--The Director shall under 
subsection (a)(1) provide for a program under which samples of tissues 
and genetic materials that are of use in research on autism are 
donated, collected, preserved, and made available for such research. 
The program shall be carried out in accordance with accepted scientific 
and medical standards for the donation, collection, and preservation of 
such samples.
    ``(e) Information and Education.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director shall establish and 
        implement a program to provide information and education on 
        autism to health professionals and the general public, 
        including information and education on advances in the 
        diagnosis and treatment of autism and training and continuing 
        education through programs for scientists, physicians, and 
        other health professionals who provide care for patients with 
        autism.
            ``(2) Stipends.--The Director may use amounts made 
        available under this section to provide stipends for health 
        professionals who are enrolled in training programs under this 
        section.
    ``(f) Public Input.--The Director shall under subsection (a)(1) 
provide for means through which the public can obtain information on 
the existing and planned programs and activities of the National 
Institutes of Health with respect to autism and through which the 
Director can receive comments from the public regarding such programs 
and activities.
    ``(g) Annual Report to Congress.--The Director shall prepare and 
submit to the appropriate committees of the Congress reports regarding 
the activities carried out under this section. The first report shall 
be submitted not later than January 10, 2002, and subsequent reports 
shall be submitted annually thereafter.
    ``(h) Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there 
are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for 
each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005. Such authorizations of 
appropriations are in addition to any other authorizations of 
appropriations that are available for such purpose.''.

         TITLE II--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT REGARDING FRAGILE X

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Fragile X Research Breakthrough 
Act of 2000''.

SEC. 202. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT; 
              RESEARCH ON FRAGILE X.

    Subpart 7 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act is 
amended by adding at the end the following section:

                              ``fragile x

    ``Sec. 452E. (a) Expansion and Coordination of Research 
Activities.--The Director of the Institute, after consultation with the 
advisory council for the Institute, shall expand, intensify, and 
coordinate the activities of the Institute with respect to research on 
the disease known as fragile X.
    ``(b) Research Centers.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Institute, after 
        consultation with the advisory council for the Institute, shall 
        make grants to, or enter into contracts with, public or 
        nonprofit private entities for the development and operation of 
        centers to conduct research for the purposes of improving the 
        diagnosis and treatment of, and finding the cure for, fragile 
        X.
            ``(2) Number of centers.--In carrying out paragraph (1), 
        the Director of the Institute shall, to the extent that amounts 
        are appropriated, provide for the establishment of at least 
        three fragile X research centers.
            ``(3) Activities.--
                    ``(A) In general.--Each center assisted under 
                paragraph (1) shall, with respect to fragile X--
                            ``(i) conduct basic and clinical research, 
                        which may include clinical trials of--
                                    ``(I) new or improved diagnostic 
                                methods; and
                                    ``(II) drugs or other treatment 
                                approaches; and
                            ``(ii) conduct research to find a cure.
                    ``(B) Fees.--A center may use funds provided under 
                paragraph (1) to provide fees to individuals serving as 
                subjects in clinical trials conducted under 
                subparagraph (A).
            ``(4) Coordination among centers.--The Director of the 
        Institute shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination 
        of the activities of the centers assisted under this section, 
        including providing for the exchange of information among the 
        centers.
            ``(5) Certain administrative requirements.--Each center 
        assisted under paragraph (1) shall use the facilities of a 
        single institution, or be formed from a consortium of 
        cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be 
        prescribed by the Director of the Institute.
            ``(6) Duration of support.--Support may be provided to a 
        center under paragraph (1) for a period not exceeding 5 years. 
        Such period may be extended for one or more additional periods, 
        each of which may not exceed 5 years, if the operations of such 
        center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and 
        scientific peer review group established by the Director and if 
        such group has recommended to the Director that such period be 
        extended.
            ``(7) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of 
        carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be 
        appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the 
        fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

SEC. 203. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHILD HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT; 
              LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING RESEARCH ON FRAGILE X.

    Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 288 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 487E the following 
section:

        ``loan repayment program regarding research on fragile x

    ``Sec. 487F. (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, shall establish a program under which the Federal 
Government enters into contracts with qualified health professionals 
(including graduate students) who agree to conduct research regarding 
fragile X in consideration of the Federal Government's agreement to 
repay, for each year of such service, not more than $35,000 of the 
principal and interest of the educational loans owed by such health 
professionals.
    ``(b) Applicability of Certain Provisions.--With respect to the 
National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in 
subpart III of part D of title III, the provisions of such subpart 
(including section 338B(g)(3)) shall, except as inconsistent with 
subsection (a) of this section, apply to the program established in 
such subsection in the same manner and to the same extent as such 
provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment 
Program established in such subpart.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

          TITLE III--JUVENILE ARTHRITIS AND RELATED CONDITIONS

SEC. 301. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ARTHRITIS AND MUSCULOSKELETAL AND SKIN 
              DISEASES; RESEARCH ON JUVENILE ARTHRITIS AND RELATED 
              CONDITIONS.

    Subpart 4 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 285d et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 442 the 
following section:

              ``juvenile arthritis and related conditions

    ``Sec. 442A. (a) Expansion and Coordination of Activities.--The 
Director of the Institute, in coordination with the Director of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, shall expand and 
intensify the programs of such Institutes with respect to research and 
related activities concerning juvenile arthritis and related 
conditions.
    ``(b) Coordination.--The Directors referred to in subsection (a) 
shall jointly coordinate the programs referred to in such subsection 
and consult with the Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Diseases Interagency 
Coordinating Committee.
    ``(c) Pediatric Rheumatology.--The Secretary, acting through the 
appropriate agencies of the Public Health Service, shall develop a 
coordinated effort to help ensure that a national infrastructure is in 
place to train and develop pediatric rheumatologists to address the 
health care services requirements of children with arthritis and 
related conditions.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

SEC. 302. INFORMATION CLEARINGHOUSE.

    Section 438(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 285d-
3(b)) is amended by inserting ``, including juvenile arthritis and 
related conditions,'' after ``diseases''.

     TITLE IV--REDUCING BURDEN OF DIABETES AMONG CHILDREN AND YOUTH

SEC. 401. PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 102 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317H the 
following section:

                    ``diabetes in children and youth

    ``Sec. 317I. (a) National Registry on Juvenile Diabetes.--The 
Secretary , acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, shall develop a system to collect data on 
juvenile diabetes, including with respect to incidence and prevalence, 
and shall establish a national database for such data.
    ``(b) Type 2 Diabetes in Youth.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in 
consultation with the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
Services Administration, shall implement a national public health 
effort to address type 2 diabetes in youth, including--
            ``(1) enhancing surveillance systems and expanding research 
        to better assess the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in youth and 
        determine the extent to which type 2 diabetes is incorrectly 
        diagnosed as type 1 diabetes among children;
            ``(2) assisting States in establishing coordinated school 
        health programs and physical activity and nutrition 
        demonstration programs to control weight and increase physical 
        activity among youth; and
            ``(3) developing and improving laboratory methods to assist 
        in diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of diabetes including, 
        but not limited to, developing noninvasive ways to monitor 
        blood glucose to prevent hypoglycema and improving existing 
        glucometers that measure blood glucose.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

SEC. 402. PROGRAMS OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    Subpart 3 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 285c et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 434 the 
following section:

                          ``juvenile diabetes

    ``Sec. 434A. (a) Long-Term Epidemiology Studies.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Institute shall 
        conduct or support long-term epidemiology studies in which 
        individuals with type 1, or juvenile, diabetes are followed for 
        10 years or more. Such studies shall, in order to provide a 
        valuable resource for the purposes specified in paragraph (2), 
        provide for complete characterization of disease 
        manifestations, appropriate medical history, elucidation of 
        environmental factors, delineation of complications, results of 
        usual medical treatment and a variety of other potential 
        valuable (such as samples of blood).
            ``(2) Purposes.--The purposes referred to in paragraph (1) 
        with respect to type 1 diabetes are the following:
                    ``(A) Delineation of potential environmental 
                triggers thought precipitating or causing type 1 
                diabetes.
                    ``(B) Delineation of those clinical characteristics 
                or lab measures associated with complications of the 
                disease.
                    ``(C) Potential study population to enter into 
                clinical trials for prevention and treatment, as well 
                as genetic studies.
    ``(b) Clinical Trial Infrastructure/Innovative Treatments for 
Juvenile Diabetes.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the 
National Institutes of Health, shall support regional clinical centers 
for the cure of juvenile diabetes and shall through such centers 
provide for--
            ``(1) well-characterized population of children appropriate 
        for study;
            ``(2) well-trained clinical scientists able to conduct such 
        trials;
            ``(3) appropriate clinical settings able to house such 
        studies; and
            ``(4) appropriate statistical capability, data, safety and 
        other monitoring capacity.
    ``(c) Development of Vaccine.--The Secretary, acting through the 
appropriate agencies of the Public Health Service, shall provide for a 
national effort to develop a vaccine for type 1 diabetes. Such effort 
shall provide for a combination of increased efforts in research and 
development of candidate vaccines, coupled with appropriate ability to 
conduct large clinical trials in children.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

            TITLE V--ASTHMA TREATMENT SERVICES FOR CHILDREN

SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Children's Asthma Relief Act of 
2000''.

                         Subtitle A--Treatment

SEC. 511. GRANTS FOR CHILDREN'S ASTHMA RELIEF.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following part:

                     ``PART P--ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS

``SEC. 399L. CHILDREN'S ASTHMA TREATMENT GRANTS PROGRAM.

    ``(a) Authority To Make Grants.--
            ``(1) In general.--In addition to any other payments made 
        under this Act or title V of the Social Security Act, the 
        Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to carry out 
        the following purposes:
                    ``(A) To provide access to quality medical care for 
                children who live in areas that have a high prevalence 
                of asthma and who lack access to medical care.
                    ``(B) To provide on-site education to parents, 
                children, health care providers, and medical teams to 
                recognize the signs and symptoms of asthma, and to 
                train them in the use of medications to treat asthma 
                and prevent its exacerbations.
                    ``(C) To decrease preventable trips to the 
                emergency room by making medication available to 
                individuals who have not previously had access to 
                treatment or education in the management of asthma.
                    ``(D) To provide other services, such as smoking 
                cessation programs, home modification, and other direct 
                and support services that ameliorate conditions that 
                exacerbate or induce asthma.
            ``(2) Certain projects.--In making grants under paragraph 
        (1), the Secretary may make grants designed to develop and 
        expand the following projects:
                    ``(A) Projects to provide comprehensive asthma 
                services to children in accordance with the guidelines 
                of the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program 
                (through the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute), 
                including access to care and treatment for asthma in a 
                community-based setting;
                    ``(B) Projects to demonstrate mobile health care 
                clinics that in accordance with such guidelines provide 
                preventive asthma care. Such projects shall be 
                evaluated and reports describing the findings of the 
                evaluations shall be submitted to the Congress.
                    ``(C) Projects to conduct validated asthma 
                management education programs for patients with asthma 
                and their families, including patient education 
                regarding asthma management, family education on asthma 
                management, and the distribution of materials, 
                including displays and videos, to reinforce concepts 
                presented by medical teams.
            ``(2) Award of grants.--
                    ``(A) Application.--
                            ``(i) In general.--An eligible entity shall 
                        submit an application to the Secretary for a 
                        grant under this section in such form and 
                        manner as the Secretary may require.
                            ``(ii) Required information.--An 
                        application submitted under this subparagraph 
                        shall include a plan for the use of funds 
                        awarded under the grant and such other 
                        information as the Secretary may require.
                    ``(B) Requirement.--In awarding grants under this 
                section, the Secretary shall give preference to 
                eligible entities that demonstrate that the activities 
                to be carried out under this section shall be in 
                localities within areas of known or suspected high 
                prevalence of childhood asthma or high asthma-related 
                mortality (relative to the average asthma prevalence 
                rates and associated mortality rates in the United 
                States). Acceptable data sets to demonstrate a high 
                prevalence of childhood asthma or high asthma-related 
                mortality may include data from Federal, State, or 
                local vital statistics, claims data under title XIX or 
                XXI of the Social Security Act, other public health 
                statistics or surveys, or other data that the 
                Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the 
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, deems 
                appropriate.
            ``(3) Definition of eligible entity.--For purposes of this 
        section, the term `eligible entity' means a State agency or 
        other entity receiving funds under title V of the Social 
        Security Act, a local community, a nonprofit children's 
        hospital or foundation, or a nonprofit community-based 
        organization.
    ``(b) Coordination With Other Children's Programs.--An eligible 
entity shall identify in the plan submitted as part of an application 
for a grant under this section how the entity will coordinate 
operations and activities under the grant with--
            ``(1) other programs operated in the State that serve 
        children with asthma, including any such programs operated 
        under titles V, XIX, or XXI of the Social Security Act; and
            ``(2) one or more of the following--
                    ``(A) the child welfare and foster care and 
                adoption assistance programs under parts B and E of 
                title IV of such Act;
                    ``(B) the head start program established under the 
                Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.);
                    ``(C) the program of assistance under the special 
                supplemental nutrition program for women, infants and 
                children (WIC) under section 17 of the Child Nutrition 
                Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786);
                    ``(D) local public and private elementary or 
                secondary schools; or
                    ``(E) public housing agencies, as defined in 
                section 3 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 
                U.S.C. 1437a).
    ``(c) Evaluation.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under 
this section shall submit to the Secretary an evaluation of the 
operations and activities carried out under the grant that includes--
            ``(1) a description of the health status outcomes of 
        children assisted under the grant;
            ``(2) an assessment of the utilization of asthma-related 
        health care services as a result of activities carried out 
        under the grant;
            ``(3) the collection, analysis, and reporting of asthma 
        data according to guidelines prescribed by the Director of the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and
            ``(4) such other information as the Secretary may require.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

SEC. 512. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

    Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 241 et seq.) 
is amended--
            (1) in part L, by redesignating section 399D as section 
        399A;
            (2) in part M--
                    (A) by redesignating sections 399H through 399L as 
                sections 399B through 399F, respectively;
                    (B) in section 399B (as so redesignated), in 
                subsection (e)--
                            (i) by striking ``section 399K(b)'' and 
                        inserting ``subsection (b) of section 399E''; 
                        and
                            (ii) by striking ``section 399C'' and 
                        inserting ``such section'';
                    (C) in section 399E (as so redesignated), in 
                subsection (c), by striking ``section 399H(a)'' and 
                inserting ``section 399B(a)''; and
                    (D) in section 399F (as so redesignated)--
                            (i) in subsection (a), by striking 
                        ``section 399I'' and inserting ``section 
                        399C'';
                            (ii) in subsection (a), by striking 
                        ``subsection 399J'' and inserting ``section 
                        399D''; and
                            (iii) in subsection (b), by striking 
                        ``subsection 399K'' and inserting ``section 
                        399E'';
            (3) in part N, by redesignating section 399F as section 
        399G; and
            (4) in part O--
                    (A) by redesignating sections 399G through 399J as 
                sections 399H through 399K, respectively;
                    (B) in section 399H (as so redesignated), in 
                subsection (b), by striking ``section 399H'' and 
                inserting ``section 399I'';
                    (C) in section 399J (as so redesignated), in 
                subsection (b), by striking ``section 399G(d)'' and 
                inserting ``section 399H(d)''; and
                    (D) in section 399K (as so redesignated), by 
                striking ``section 399G(d)(1)'' and inserting ``section 
                399H(d)(1)''.

                   Subtitle B--Prevention Activities

SEC. 521. PREVENTIVE HEALTH AND HEALTH SERVICES BLOCK GRANT; SYSTEMS 
              FOR REDUCING ASTHMA-RELATED ILLNESSES THROUGH URBAN 
              COCKROACH MANAGEMENT.

    Section 1904(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
300w-3(a)(1)) is amended--
            (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) and (F) as 
        subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively;
            (2) by adding a period at the end of subparagraph (G) (as 
        so redesignated);
            (3) by inserting after subparagraph (D), the following:
            ``(E) The establishment, operation, and coordination of 
        effective and cost-efficient systems to reduce the prevalence 
        of asthma and asthma-related illnesses among urban populations, 
        especially children, by reducing the level of exposure to 
        cockroach allergen through the use of integrated pest 
        management, as applied to cockroaches. Amounts expended for 
        such systems may include the costs of building maintenance and 
        the costs of programs to promote community participation in the 
        carrying out at such sites of integrated pest management, as 
        applied to cockroaches. For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
        term `integrated pest management' means an approach to the 
        management of pests in public facilities that combines 
        biological, cultural, physical, and chemical tools in a way 
        that minimizes economic, health, and environmental risks.'';
            (4) in subparagraph (F) (as so redesignated), by striking 
        ``subparagraphs (A) through (D)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs 
        (A) through (E)''; and
            (5) in subparagraph (G) (as so redesignated), by striking 
        ``subparagraphs (A) through (E)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs 
        (A) through (F)''.

             Subtitle C--Coordination of Federal Activities

SEC. 531. COORDINATION THROUGH NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    Subpart 2 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 285b et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 424A the 
following section:

              ``coordination of federal asthma activities

    ``Sec. 424B (a) In General.--The Director of Institute shall, 
through the National Asthma Education Prevention Program Coordinating 
Committee--
            ``(1) identify all Federal programs that carry out asthma-
        related activities;
            ``(2) develop, in consultation with appropriate Federal 
        agencies and professional and voluntary health organizations, a 
        Federal plan for responding to asthma; and
            ``(3) not later than 12 months after the date of the 
        enactment of the Children's Health Act of 2000, submit 
        recommendations to the appropirate committees of the Congress 
        on ways to strengthen and improve the coordination of asthma-
        related activities of the Federal Government.
    ``(b) Representation of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.--A representative of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development shall be included on the National Asthma Education 
Prevention Program Coordinating Committee for the purpose of performing 
the tasks described in subsection (a).
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                    Subtitle D--Compilation of Data

SEC. 541. COMPILATION OF DATA BY CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND 
              PREVENTION.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 401 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317I the 
following section:

                    ``compilation of data on asthma

    ``Sec. 317J. (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in 
consultation with the Director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, shall--
            ``(1) conduct local asthma surveillance activities to 
        collect data on the prevalence and severity of asthma and the 
        quality of asthma management;
            ``(2) compile and annually publish data on the prevalence 
        of children suffering from asthma in each State; and
            ``(3) to the extent practicable, compile and publish data 
        on the childhood mortality rate associated with asthma 
        nationally.
    ``(b) National Coordinating Committee.--The Director of the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute shall in carrying out 
subsection (a) consult with the National Asthma Education Prevention 
Program Coordinating Committee.
    ``(c) Collaborative Efforts.--The activities described in 
subsection (a)(1) may be conducted in collaboration with eligible 
entities awarded a grant under section 399L.''.

             TITLE VI--BIRTH DEFECTS PREVENTION ACTIVITIES

                         Subtitle A--Folic Acid

SEC. 601. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Folic Acid Promotion and Birth 
Defects Prevention Act of 2000''.

SEC. 602. PROGRAM REGARDING EFFECTS OF FOLIC ACID IN PREVENTION OF 
              BIRTH DEFECTS.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 541 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317J the 
following section:

         ``effects of folic acid in prevention of birth defects

    ``Sec. 317K. (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry 
out a program (directly or through grants or contracts) for the 
following purposes:
            ``(1) To provide education and training for health 
        professionals and the general public for purposes of explaining 
        the effects of folic acid in preventing birth defects and for 
        purposes of encouraging each woman of reproductive capacity 
        (whether or not planning a pregnancy) to consume on a daily 
        basis a dietary supplement that provides an appropriate level 
        of folic acid.
            ``(2) To conduct research with respect to such education 
        and training, including identifying effective strategies for 
        increasing the rate of consumption of folic acid by women of 
        reproductive capacity.
            ``(3) To conduct research to increase the understanding of 
        the effects of folic acid in preventing birth defects, 
        including understanding with respect to cleft lip, cleft 
        palate, and heart defects.
            ``(4) To provide for appropriate epidemiological activities 
        regarding folic acid and birth defects, including 
        epidemiological activities regarding neural tube defects.
    ``(b) Consultations With States and Private Entities.--In carrying 
out subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with the States and 
with other appropriate public or private entities, including national 
nonprofit private organizations, health professionals, and providers of 
health insurance and health plans.
    ``(c) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may (directly or through 
grants or contracts) provide technical assistance to public and 
nonprofit private entities in carrying out the activities described in 
subsection (a).
    ``(d) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall (directly or through grants 
or contracts) provide for the evaluation of activities under subsection 
(a) in order to determine the extent to which such activities have been 
effective in carrying out the purposes of the program under such 
subsection, including the effects on various demographic populations. 
Methods of evaluation under the preceding sentence may include surveys 
of knowledge and attitudes on the consumption of folic acid and on 
blood folate levels. Such methods may include complete and timely 
monitoring of infants who are born with neural tube defects.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

    Subtitle B--National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
                              Disabilities

SEC. 611. NATIONAL CENTER ON BIRTH DEFECTS AND
              DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES.

    Section 317C of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247b-4) is 
amended--
            (1) by striking the heading for the section and inserting 
        the following:

  ``national center on birth defects and developmental disabilities'';

            (2) by striking ``Sec. 317C. (a)'' and all that follows 
        through the end of subsection (a) and inserting the following:
    ``Sec. 317C. (a) In General.--
            ``(1) National center.--There is established within the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention a center to be known 
        as the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
        Disabilities (referred to in this section as the `Center'), 
        which shall be headed by a director appointed by the Director 
        of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
            ``(2) General duties.--The Secretary shall carry out 
        programs--
                    (A) to collect, analyze, and make available data on 
                birth defects (in a manner that facilitates compliance 
                with subsection (d)(2)), including data on the causes 
                of such defects and on the incidence and prevalence of 
                such defects;
                    (B) to operate regional centers for the conduct of 
                applied epidemiological research on the prevention of 
                such defects; and
                    (C) to provide information and education to the 
                public on the prevention of such defects.
            ``(3) Folic acid.--The Secretary shall carry out section 
        317K through the Center.
            ``(4) Certain programs.--
                    ``(A) Transfers.--All programs and functions 
                described in subparagraph (B) are transferred to the 
                Center, effective on the date of the enactment of the 
                Children's Health Act of 2000.
                    ``(B) Relevant programs.--The programs and 
                functions described in this subparagraph are all 
                programs and functions that--
                            ``(i) relate to birth defects, folic acid, 
                        cerebral palsy, mental retardation, child 
                        development, newborn screening, autism, fragile 
                        X syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, pediatric 
                        genetics, or disability prevention; and
                            ``(ii) were carried out through the 
                        National Center for Environmental Health as of 
                        the day before the date of the enactment of the 
                        Act referred to in subparagraph (A).
                    ``(C) Related transfers.--Personnel employed in 
                connection with the programs and functions specified in 
                subparagraph (B), and amounts available for carrying 
                out the programs and functions, are tranferred to the 
                Center, effective on the date of the enactment of the 
                Act referred to in subparagraph (A). Such transfer of 
                amounts does not affect the period of availability of 
                the amounts, or the availability of the amounts with 
                respect to the purposes for which the amounts may be 
                expended.''; and
            (3) in subsection (b)(1), in the matter preceding 
        subparagraph (A), by striking ``(a)(1)'' and inserting 
        ``(a)(2)(A)''.

TITLE VII--EARLY DETECTION, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT REGARDING HEARING 
                            LOSS IN INFANTS

SEC. 701. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Newborn and Infant Hearing 
Screening and Intervention Act of 2000''.

SEC. 702. PURPOSES.

    The purposes of this subtitle are to clarify the authority within 
the Public Health Service Act to authorize statewide newborn and infant 
hearing screening, evaluation and intervention programs and systems, 
technical assistance, a national applied research program, and 
interagency and private sector collaboration for policy development, in 
order to assist the States in making progress toward the following 
goals:
            (1) All babies born in hospitals in the United States and 
        its territories should have a hearing screening before leaving 
        the birthing facility. Babies born in other countries and 
        residing in the United States via immigration or adoption 
        should have a hearing screening as early as possible.
            (2) All babies who are not born in hospitals in the United 
        States and its territories should have a hearing screening 
        within the first 3 months of life.
            (3) Appropriate audiologic and medical evaluations should 
        be conducted by 3 months for all newborns and infants suspected 
        of having hearing loss to allow appropriate referral and 
        provisions for audiologic rehabilitation, medical and early 
        intervention before the age of 6 months.
            (4) All newborn and infant hearing screening programs and 
        systems should include a component for audiologic 
        rehabilitation, medical and early intervention options that 
        ensures linkage to any new and existing state-wide systems of 
        intervention and rehabilitative services for newborns and 
        infants with hearing loss.
            (5) Public policy in regard to newborn and infant hearing 
        screening and intervention should be based on applied research 
        and the recognition that newborns, infants, toddlers, and 
        children who are deaf or hard-of-hearing have unique language, 
        learning, and communication needs, and should be the result of 
        consultation with pertinent public and private sectors.

SEC. 703. PROGRAMS OF HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION, 
              CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION, AND NATIONAL 
              INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as added by 
section 511 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following 
section:

``SEC. 399M. EARLY DETECTION, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT REGARDING 
              HEARING LOSS IN INFANTS.

    ``(a) Statewide Newborn and Infant Hearing Screening, Evaluation 
and Intervention Programs and Systems.--The Secretary, acting through 
the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall make awards of grants or cooperative agreements to develop 
statewide newborn and infant hearing screening, evaluation and 
intervention programs and systems for the following purposes:
            ``(1) To develop and monitor the efficacy of state-wide 
        newborn and infant hearing screening, evaluation and 
        intervention programs and systems. Early intervention includes 
        referral to schools and agencies, including community, 
        consumer, and parent-based agencies and organizations and other 
        programs mandated by part C of the Individuals with 
        Disabilities Education Act, which offer programs specifically 
        designed to meet the unique language and communication needs of 
        deaf and hard of hearing newborns, infants, toddlers, and 
        children.
            ``(2) To collect data on statewide newborn and infant 
        hearing screening, evaluation and intervention programs and 
        systems that can be used for applied research, program 
        evaluation and policy development.
    ``(b) Technical Assistance, Data Management, and Applied 
Research.--
            ``(1) Centers for disease control and prevention.--The 
        Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
        Disease Control and Prevention, shall make awards of grants or 
        cooperative agreements to provide technical assistance to State 
        agencies to complement an intramural program and to conduct 
        applied research related to newborn and infant hearing 
        screening, evaluation and intervention programs and systems. 
        The program shall develop standardized procedures for data 
        management and program effectiveness and costs, such as--
                    ``(A) to ensure quality monitoring of newborn and 
                infant hearing loss screening, evaluation, and 
                intervention programs and systems;
                    ``(B) to provide technical assistance on data 
                collection and management;
                    ``(C) to study the costs and effectiveness of 
                newborn and infant hearing screening, evaluation and 
                intervention programs and systems conducted by State-
                based programs in order to answer issues of importance 
                to state and national policymakers;
                    ``(D) to identify the causes and risk factors for 
                congenital hearing loss;
                    ``(E) to study the effectiveness of newborn and 
                infant hearing screening, audiologic and medical 
                evaluations and intervention programs and systems by 
                assessing the health, intellectual and social 
                developmental, cognitive, and language status of these 
                children at school age; and
                    ``(F) to promote the sharing of data regarding 
                early hearing loss with State-based birth defects and 
                developmental disabilities monitoring programs for the 
                purpose of identifying previously unknown causes of 
                hearing loss.
            ``(2) National institutes of health.--The Director of the 
        National Institutes of Health, acting through the Director of 
        the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
        Disorders, shall for purposes of this section, continue a 
        program of research and development on the efficacy of new 
        screening techniques and technology, including clinical studies 
        of screening methods, studies on efficacy of intervention, and 
        related research.
    ``(c) Coordination and Collaboration.--
            ``(1) In general.--In carrying out programs under this 
        section, the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
        Administration, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
        and Prevention, and the Director of the National Institutes of 
        Health shall collaborate and consult with other Federal 
        agencies; State and local agencies, including those responsible 
for early intervention services pursuant to title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (Medicaid Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and 
Treatment Program); title XXI of the Social Security Act (State 
Children's Health Insurance Program); title V of the Social Security 
Act (Maternal and Child Health Block Grant Program); and part C of the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; consumer groups of and 
that serve individuals who are deaf and hard-of-hearing and their 
families; appropriate national medical and other health and education 
specialty organizations; persons who are deaf and hard-of-hearing and 
their families; other qualified professional personnel who are 
proficient in deaf or hard-of-hearing children's language and who 
possess the specialized knowledge, skills, and attributes needed to 
serve deaf and hard-of-hearing newborns, infants, toddlers, children, 
and their families; third-party payers and managed care organizations; 
and related commercial industries.
            ``(2) Policy development.--The Administrator of the Health 
        Resources and Services Administration, the Director of the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Director of 
        the National Institutes of Health shall coordinate and 
        collaborate on recommendations for policy development at the 
        Federal and State levels and with the private sector, including 
        consumer, medical and other health and education professional-
        based organizations, with respect to newborn and infant hearing 
        screening, evaluation and intervention programs and systems.
            ``(3) State early detection, diagnosis, and intervention 
        programs and systems; data collection.--The Administrator of 
        the Health Resources and Services Administration and the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
        shall coordinate and collaborate in assisting States to 
        establish newborn and infant hearing screening, evaluation and 
        intervention programs and systems under subsection (a) and to 
        develop a data collection system under subsection (b).
    ``(d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to preempt any State law.
    ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
            ``(1) The term `audiologic evaluation' refers to procedures 
        to assess the status of the auditory system; to establish the 
        site of the auditory disorder; the type and degree of hearing 
        loss, and the potential effects of hearing loss on 
        communication; and to identify appropriate treatment and 
        referral options. Referral options should include linkage to 
        State coordinating agencies under part C of the Individuals 
        with Disabilities Education Act or other appropriate agencies, 
        medical evaluation, hearing aid/sensory aid assessment, 
        audiologic rehabilitation treatment, national and local 
        consumer, self-help, parent, and education organizations, and 
        other family-centered services.
            ``(2) The terms `audiologic rehabilitation' and `audiologic 
        intervention' refer to procedures, techniques, and technologies 
        to facilitate the receptive and expressive communication 
        abilities of a child with hearing loss.
            ``(3) The term `early intervention' refer to providing 
        appropriate services for the child with hearing loss, including 
        nonmedical services, and ensuring that families of the child 
        are provided comprehensive, consumer-oriented information about 
        the full range of family support, training, information 
        services, communication options and are given the opportunity 
        to consider the full range of educational and program 
        placements and options for their child.
            ``(4) The term `medical evaluation by a physician' refers 
        to key components including history, examination, and medical 
        decision making focused on symptomatic and related body systems 
        for the purpose of diagnosing the etiology of hearing loss and 
        related physical conditions, and for identifying appropriate 
        treatment and referral options.
            ``(5) The term `medical intervention' refers to the process 
        by which a physician provides medical diagnosis and direction 
        for medical and/or surgical treatment options of hearing loss 
        and/or related medical disorder associated with hearing loss.
            ``(6) The term `newborn and infant hearing screening' 
        refers to objective physiologic procedures to detect possible 
        hearing loss and to identify newborns and infants who, after 
        rescreening, require further audiologic and medical 
        evaluations.
    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--
            ``(1) Statewide newborn and infant hearing screening, 
        evaluation and intervention programs and systems.--For the 
        purpose of carrying out subsection (a), there are authorized to 
        be appropriated to the Health Resources and Services 
        Administration such sums as may be necessary for each of the 
        fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
            ``(2) Technical assistance, data management, and applied 
        research; centers for disease control and prevention.--For the 
        purpose of carrying out subsection (b)(1), there are authorized 
        to be appropriated to the Centers for Disease Control and 
        Prevention such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal 
        years 2001 through 2005.
            ``(3) Technical assistance, data management, and applied 
        research; national institute on deafness and other 
        communication disorders.--For the purpose of carrying out 
        subsection (b)(2), there are authorized to be appropriated to 
        the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
        Disorders such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal 
        years 2001 through 2005.''.

                   TITLE VIII--CHILDREN AND EPILEPSY

SEC. 801. NATIONAL PUBLIC HEALTH CAMPAIGN ON EPILEPSY; SEIZURE DISORDER 
              DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS IN MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.

    Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 254b) is amended by adding at the end the following section:

``SEC. 330E. EPILEPSY; SEIZURE DISORDER.

    ``(a) National Public Health Campaign.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and 
        implement public health surveillance, education, research, and 
        intervention strategies to improve the lives of persons with 
        epilepsy, with a particular emphasis on children. Such projects 
        may be carried out by the Secretary directly and through awards 
        of grants or contracts to public or nonprofit private entities. 
        The Secretary may directly or through such awards provide 
        technical assistance with respect to the planning, development, 
        and operation of such projects.
            ``(2) Certain activities.--Activities under paragraph (1) 
        shall include--
                    ``(A) expanding current surveillance activities 
                through existing monitoring systems and improving 
                registries that maintain data on individuals with 
                epilepsy, including children;
                    ``(B) enhancing research activities on patient 
                management and control of epilepsy;
                    ``(C) implementing public and professional 
                information and education programs regarding epilepsy, 
                including initiatives which promote effective 
                management and control of the disease through 
                children's programs which are targeted to parents, 
                schools, daycare providers, patients;
                    ``(D) undertaking educational efforts with the 
                media, providers of health care, schools and others 
                regarding stigmas and secondary disabilities related to 
                epilepsy and seizures, and also its affects on youth;
                    ``(E) utilizing and expanding partnerships with 
                organizations with experience addressing the health and 
                related needs of people with disabilities; and
                    ``(F) other activities the Secretary deems 
                appropriate.
            ``(3) Coordination of activities.--The Secretary shall 
        ensure that activities under this subsection are coordinated as 
        appropriate with other agencies of the Public Health Service 
        that carry out activities regarding epilepsy and seizure.
    ``(b) Seizure Disorder; Demonstration Projects in Medically 
Underserved Areas.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Administrator of the Health Resources and Services 
        Administration, may make grants to States and local governments 
        for the purpose of carrying out demonstration projects to 
        improve access to health and other services regarding seizures 
        to encourage early detection and treatment in children and 
        others residing in medically underserved areas.
            ``(2) Application for grant.--The Secretary may make a 
        grant under paragraph (1) only if the application for the grant 
        is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such 
        form, is made in such matter, and contains such agreements, 
        assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be 
        necessary to carry out this subsection.
    ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
            ``(1) The term ``epilepsy'' refers to a chronic and serious 
        neurological condition which produces excessive electrical 
        discharges in the brain causing recurring seizures affecting 
        all life activities. The Secretary may revise the definition of 
        such term as the Secretary.
            ``(2) The term ``medically underserved'' has the meaning 
        applicable under section 799B(6).
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

           TITLE IX--SAFE MOTHERHOOD; INFANT HEALTH PROMOTION

     Subtitle A--Safe Motherhood Monitoring and Prevention Research

SEC. 901. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Safe Motherhood Monitoring and 
Prevention Research Act''.

SEC. 902. MONITORING; PREVENTION RESEARCH AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 602 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317K the 
following section:

                           ``safe motherhood

    ``Sec. 317L. (a) Monitoring.--
            ``(1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to 
        develop monitoring systems at the local, State, and national 
        level to better understand the burden of maternal complications 
        and mortality and to decrease the disparities among population 
        at risk of death and complications from pregnancy.
            ``(2) Activities.--For the purpose described in paragraph 
        (1), the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers 
        for Disease Control and Prevention, may carry out the following 
        activities:
                    ``(A) the Secretary may establish and implement a 
                national monitoring and surveillance program to 
                identify and promote the investigation of deaths and 
                severe complications that occur during pregnancy.
                    ``(B) The Secretary may expand the Pregnancy Risk 
                Assessment Monitoring System to provide surveillance 
                and collect data in each of the 50 States.
                    ``(C) The Secretary may expand the Maternal and 
                Child Health Epidemiology Program to provide technical 
                support, financial assistance, or the time-limited 
                assignment of senior epidemiologists to maternal and 
                child health programs in each of the 50 States.
    ``(b) Prevention Research.--
    ``(1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to provide the 
Secretary with the authority to further expand research concerning risk 
factors, prevention strategies, and the roles of the family, health 
care providers and the community in safe motherhood.
            ``(2) Research.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
        of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may carry 
        out activities to expand research relating to--
                    ``(A) encouraging preconception counseling, 
                especially for at risk populations such as diabetics;
                    ``(B) the identification of critical components of 
                prenatal delivery and postpartum care;
                    ``(C) the identification of outreach and support 
                services, such as folic acid education, that are 
                available for pregnant women;
                    ``(D) the identification of women who are at high 
                risk for complications;
                    ``(E) preventing preterm delivery;
                    ``(F) preventing urinary tract infections;
                    ``(G) preventing unnecessary caesarean sections;
                    ``(H) an examination of the higher rates of 
                maternal mortality among african american women;
                    ``(I) an examination of the relationship between 
                domestic violence and maternal complications and 
                mortality;
                    ``(J) preventing smoking, alcohol and illegal drug 
                usage before, during and after pregnancy;
                    ``(K) preventing infections that cause maternal and 
                infant complications; and
                    ``(L) other areas determined appropriate by the 
                Secretary.
    ``(c) Prevention Programs.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may 
        carry out activities to promote safe motherhood, including--
                    ``(A) public education campaigns on healthy 
                pregnancies and the building of partnerships with 
                outside organizations concerned about safe motherhood;
                    ``(B) education programs for physicians, nurses and 
                other health care providers; and
                    ``(C) activities to promote community support 
                services for pregnant women.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

       Subtitle B--Pregnant Mothers and Infants Health Promotion

SEC. 911. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Pregnant Mothers and Infants 
Health Protection Act''.

SEC. 912. PROGRAMS REGARDING PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL HEALTH.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 902 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317L the 
following section:

                    ``prenatal and postnatal health

    ``Sec. 317M. (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry 
out programs--
            ``(1) to collect, analyze, and make available data on 
        prenatal smoking, alcohol and illegal drug usage, including 
        data on the implications of such activities and on the 
        incidence and prevalence of such activities and their 
        implications;
            ``(2) to conduct applied epidemiological research on the 
        prevention of prenatal and postnatal smoking, alcohol and 
        illegal drug usage;
            ``(3) to support, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness 
        of educational and cessation programs; and
            ``(4) to provide information and education to the public on 
        the prevention and implications of prenatal and postnatal 
        smoking, alcohol and illegal drug usage.
    ``(b) Grants.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary may 
award grants to and enter into contracts with States, local 
governments, scientific and academic institutions, Federally qualified 
health centers, and other public and nonprofit entities, and may 
provide technical and consultative assistance to such entities.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

              TITLE X--REVISION AND EXTENSION OF PROGRAMS

               Subtitle A--Pediatric Research Initiative

SEC. 1001. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Pediatric Research Initiative 
Act of 2000''.

SEC. 1002. ESTABLISHMENT OF PEDIATRIC RESEARCH
              INITIATIVE.

    Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 112 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following:

                    ``pediatric research initiative

    ``Sec. 409D. (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish 
within the Office of the Director of NIH a Pediatric Research 
Initiative (referred to in this section as the `Initiative'). The 
Initiative shall be headed by the Director of NIH.
    ``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Initiative is to provide funds 
to enable the Director of NIH to provide--
            ``(1) increased support for pediatric biomedical research 
        within the National Institutes of Health to ensure that the 
        expanding opportunities for advancement in scientific 
        investigations and care for children are realized;
            ``(2) enhanced collaborative efforts among the Institutes 
        to support multidisciplinary research in the areas that the 
        Director deems most promising; and
            ``(3) the development of adequate pediatric clinical trials 
        and pediatric use information to promote the safer and more 
        effective use of prescription drugs in the pediatric 
        population.
    ``(c) Duties.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of NIH 
shall--
            ``(1) consult with the Director of the National Institute 
        of Child Health and Human Development and the Directors of the 
        other national research institutes, in considering their 
        requests for new or expanded pediatric research efforts, and 
        consult with the Administrator of the Health Resources and 
        Services Administration and other advisors as the Director 
        determines to be appropriate;
            ``(2) have broad discretion in the allocation of any 
        Initiative assistance among the Institutes, among types of 
        grants, and between basic and clinical research so long as 
        the--
                    ``(A) assistance is directly related to the 
                illnesses and conditions of children; and
                    ``(B) assistance is extramural in nature; and
            ``(3) be responsible for the oversight of any newly 
        appropriated Initiative funds and annually report to Congress 
        and the public on the extent of the total extramural support 
        for pediatric research across the NIH, including the specific 
        support and research awards allocated through the Initiative.
    ``(d) Authorization.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
    ``(e) Transfer of Funds.--The Director of NIH may transfer amounts 
appropriated under this section to any of the Institutes for a fiscal 
year to carry out the purposes of the Initiative under this section.''.

SEC. 1003. INVESTMENT IN TOMORROW'S PEDIATRIC
              RESEARCHERS.

    Subpart 7 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 921 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

            ``investment in tomorrow's pediatric researchers

    ``Sec. 452G. (a) In General.--In order to ensure the future supply 
of researchers dedicated to the care and research needs of children, 
the Director of the Institute, after consultation with the 
Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, 
shall support activities to provide for--
            ``(1) an increase in the number and size of institutional 
        training grants to pediatric departments of medical schools and 
        to children's hospitals; and
            ``(2) an increase in the number of career development 
        awards for health professionals who are in pediatric 
        specialties or subspecialties and intend to build careers in 
        pediatric basic and clinical research.
    ``(b) Authorization.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, 
there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                       Subtitle B--Other Programs

SEC. 1011. CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATIONS.

    Section 317(j)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
247b(j)(1)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``1998'' and 
all that follows and inserting ``1998 through 2003.''.

SEC. 1012. SCREENINGS, REFERRALS, AND EDUCATION REGARDING LEAD 
              POISONING.

    Section 317A(l)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
247b-1(l)(1)) is amended by striking ``1994'' and all that follows and 
inserting ``1994 through 2003.''.

               TITLE XI--CHILDHOOD SKELETAL MALIGNANCIES

SEC. 1101. PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION AND 
              NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 703 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following 
section:

``SEC. 399N. CHILDHOOD SKELETAL MALIGNANCIES.

    ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting as appropriate through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 
Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall study 
environmental and other risk factors for childhood skeletal cancers, 
and carry out projects to improve outcomes among children with 
childhood skeletal cancers and resultant secondary conditions, 
including limb loss. Such projects shall be carried out by the 
Secretary directly and through awards of grants or contracts to public 
or nonprofit entities.
    ``(b) Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) 
include--
            ``(1) the expansion of current demographic data collection 
        and population surveillance efforts to include childhood 
        skeletal cancers nationally;
            ``(2) the development of a uniform reporting system under 
        which treating physicians, hospitals, clinics, and states 
        report the diagnosis of childhood skeletal cancers, including 
        relevant associated epidemiological data; and
            ``(3) support for the National Limb Loss Information Center 
        to address, in part, the primary and secondary needs of persons 
        who experience childhood skeletal cancers in order to prevent 
        or minimize the disabling nature of these cancers.
    ``(c) Coordination of Activities.--The Secretary shall assure that 
activities under this section are coordinated as appropriate with other 
agencies of the Public Health Service that carry out activities focused 
on childhood cancers and limb loss.
    ``(d) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`childhood skeletal cancer' refers to any malignancy originating in the 
connective tissue of a person before skeletal maturity including the 
appendicular and axial skeleton. The Secretary may for purposes of this 
section revise the definition of such term to the extent determined by 
the Secretary to be appropriate.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                     TITLE XII--ADOPTION AWARENESS

                 Subtitle A--Infant Adoption Awareness

SEC. 1201. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the ``Infant Adoption Awareness Act 
of 2000''.

SEC. 1202. GRANTS REGARDING INFANT ADOPTION AWARENESS.

    Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 801 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:

``SEC. 330F. CERTAIN SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN.

    ``(a) Infant Adoption Awareness.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall make grants to 
        national, regional, or local adoption organizations for the 
        purpose of developing and implementing programs to train the 
        designated staff of eligible health centers in providing 
        adoption information and referrals to pregnant women on an 
        equal basis with all other courses of action included in 
        nondirective counseling.
            ``(2) Best-practices guidelines.--
                    ``(A) In general.--A condition for the receipt of a 
                grant under paragraph (1) is that the adoption 
                organization involved agree that, in providing training 
                under such paragraph, the organization will follow the 
                guidelines developed under subparagraph (B).
                    ``(B) Process for development of guidelines.--
                            ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
                        establish and supervise a process described in 
                        clause (ii) in which the participants are--
                                    ``(I) an appropriate number and 
                                variety of adoption organizations that 
                                have expertise in all models of 
                                adoption practice and that represent 
                                all members of the adoption triad 
                                (birth mother, infant, and adoptive 
                                parent); and
                                    ``(II) affected public health 
                                entities.
                            ``(ii) Description of process.--The process 
                        referred to in clause (i) is a process in which 
                        the participants described in such clause 
                        collaborate to develop best-practices 
                        guidelines on the provision of adoption 
                        information and referrals to pregnant women on 
                        an equal basis with all other courses of action 
                        included in nondirective counseling.
                            ``(iii) Date certain for developement.--The 
                        Secretary shall ensure that the guidelines 
                        described in clause (ii) are developed not 
                        later than 180 days after the date of the 
                        enactment of the Children's Health Act of 2000.
                    ``(C) Relation to authority for grants.--The 
                Secretary may not make any grant under paragraph (1) 
                before the date on which the guidelines under 
                subparagraph (B) are developed.
            ``(3) Use of grant.--
                    ``(A) In general.--With respect to a grant under 
                paragraph (1)--
                            ``(i) an adoption organization may expend 
                        the grant to carry out the programs directly or 
                        through grants to or contracts with other 
                        adoption organizations;
                            ``(ii) the purposes for which the adoption 
                        organization expends the grant may include the 
                        development of a training curriculum, 
                        consistent with the guidelines developed under 
                        paragraph (2)(B); and
                            ``(iii) a condition for the receipt of the 
                        grant is that the adoption organization agree 
                        that, in providing training for the designated 
                        staff of eligible health centers, such 
                        organization will make reasonable efforts to 
                        ensure that the individuals who provide the 
                        training are individuals who are experienced in 
                        providing adoption information and referrals in 
                        the geographic areas in which the eligible 
                        health centers are located, and that the 
                        designated staff receive the training in such 
                        areas.
                    ``(B) Rule of construction regarding training of 
                trainers.--With respect to individuals who under a 
                grant under paragraph (1) provide training for the 
                designated staff of eligible health centers (referred 
                to in this subparagraph as `trainers'), subparagraph 
                (A)(iii) may not be construed as establishing any 
                limitation regarding the geographic area in which the 
                trainers receive instruction in being such trainers. A 
                trainer may receive such instruction in a different 
                geographic area than the area in which the trainer 
                trains (or will train) the designated staff of eligible 
                health centers.
            ``(4) Adoption organizations; eligible health centers; 
        other definitions.--For purposes of this section:
                    ``(A) The term `adoption organization' means a 
                national, regional, or local organization--
                            ``(i) among whose foci are adoption;
                            ``(ii) that is knowledgeable on the process 
                        for adopting a child and on providing adoption 
                        information and referrals to pregnant women; 
                        and
                            ``(iii) that is a nonprofit private entity.
                    ``(B) The term `designated staff', with respect to 
                an eligible health center, means staff of the center 
                who provide pregnancy or adoption information and 
                referrals (or will provide such information and 
                referrals after receiving training under a grant under 
                paragraph (1)).
                    ``(C) The term `eligible health centers' means 
                public and nonprofit private entities that provide 
                health-related services to pregnant women.
            ``(5) Training for certain eligible health centers.--A 
        condition for the receipt of a grant under paragraph (1) is 
        that the adoption organization involved agree to make 
        reasonable efforts to ensure that the eligible health centers 
        with respect to which training under the grant is provided 
        include--
                    ``(A) eligible health centers that receive grants 
                under section 1001 (relating to voluntary family 
                planning projects);
                    ``(B) eligible health centers that receive grants 
                under section 330 (relating to community health 
                centers, migrant health centers, and centers regarding 
homeless individuals and residents of public housing); and
                    ``(C) eligible health centers that receive grants 
                under this Act for the provision of services in 
                schools.
            ``(6) Participation of certain eligible health clinics.--In 
        the case of eligible health centers that receive grants under 
        section 330 or 1001:
                    ``(A) The Secretary shall require that, within a 
                reasonable period after the Secretary begins making 
                grants under paragraph (1), such centers make 
                reasonable efforts to encourage the designated staff of 
                the centers to undergo training through the program 
                under such paragraph.
                    ``(B) All costs of such centers in obtaining the 
                training shall be reimbursed by the organization that 
                provides the training, using grants under paragraph 
                (1).
                    ``(C) Beginning one year after the date on which 
                the Secretary first makes grants under paragraph (1), 
                the Secretary shall commence a study to evaluate the 
                extent of compliance of health centers with 
                subparagraph (A) and the extent to which nondirective 
                counseling and referrals includes adoption information 
                and referrals. After conducting the study for a 
                reasonable period of time, the Secretary shall submit 
                to the appropriate committees of the Congress a 
                reporting describing the findings of the study.
    ``(b) Requirements Regarding Federally-Funded Family Planning 
Services.--The Secretary shall require that each program providing 
voluntary family planning services with a grant from the Secretary 
provide nondirective counseling and referrals on all the options, 
including but not limited to adoption.
    ``(c) Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under 
subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the 
Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, 
and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the 
Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
    ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

              Subtitle B--Special Needs Adoption Awareness

SEC. 1211. SPECIAL NEEDS ADOPTION PROGRAMS; PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN 
              AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.

    Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 1202 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:

``SEC. 330G. SPECIAL NEEDS ADOPTION PROGRAMS; PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN 
              AND OTHER ACTIVITIES.

    ``(a) Special Needs Adoption Awareness Campaign.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall, through making 
        grants to nonprofit private entities, provide for the planning, 
        development, and carrying out of a national campaign to provide 
        information to the public regarding the adoption of children 
        with special needs.
            ``(2) Input on planning and development.--In providing for 
        the planning and development of the national campaign under 
        paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide for input from a 
        number and variety of adoption organizations throughout the 
        States in order that the full national diversity of interests 
        among adoption organizations is represented in the planning and 
        development of the campaign.
            ``(3) Certain features.--With respect to the national 
        campaign under paragraph (1):
                    ``(A) The campaign shall be directed at various 
                populations, taking into account as appropriate 
                differences among geographic regions, and shall be 
                carried out in the language and cultural context that 
                is most appropriate to the population involved.
                    ``(B) The means through which the campaign may be 
                carried out include--
                            ``(i) placing public service announcements 
                        on television, radio, and billboards; and
                            ``(ii) providing information through means 
                        that the Secretary determines will reach 
                        individuals who are most likely to adopt 
                        children with special needs.
                    ``(C) The campaign shall provide information on the 
                subsidies and supports that are available to 
                individuals regarding the adoption of children with 
                special needs.
                    ``(D) The Secretary may provide that the placement 
                of public service announcements, and the dissemination 
                of brochures and other materials, is subject to review 
                by the Secretary.
            ``(4) Matching requirement.--
                    ``(A) In general.--With respect to the costs of the 
                activities to be carried out by an entity pursuant to 
                paragraph (1), a condition for the receipt of a grant 
                under such paragraph is that the entity agree to make 
                available (directly or through donations from public or 
                private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such 
                costs in an amount that is not less than 50 percent of 
                such costs ($1 for each $1 provided in the grant).
                    ``(B) Determination of amount contributed.--Non-
                Federal contributions under subparagraph (A) may be in 
                cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, 
                equipment, or services. Amounts provided by the Federal 
                Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any 
                significant extent by the Federal Government, may not 
                be included in determining the amount of such 
                contributions.
    ``(b) National Resources Program.--The Secretary shall (directly or 
through grant or contract) carry out a program that, through toll-free 
telecommunications, makes available to the public information regarding 
the adoption of children with special needs. Such information shall 
include the following:
            ``(1) A list of national, State, and regional organizations 
        that provide services regarding such adoptions, including 
        exchanges and other information on communicating with the 
        organizations. The list shall represent the full national 
        diversity of adoption organizations.
            ``(2) Information beneficial to individuals who adopt such 
        children, including lists of support groups for adoptive 
        parents and other postadoptive services.
    ``(c) Other Programs.--With respect to the adoption of children 
with special needs, the Secretary shall make grants--
            ``(1) to provide assistance to support groups for adoptive 
        parents, adopted children, and siblings of adopted children; 
        and
            ``(2) to carry out studies to identify the reasons for 
        adoption disruptions.
    ``(d) Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make an award of a 
grant or contract under this section only if an application for the 
award is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such 
form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry 
out this section.
    ``(e) Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there 
are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for 
each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                   TITLE XIII--TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY

SEC. 1301. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Traumatic Brain Injury Act 
Amendments of 2000''.

SEC. 1302. PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

    (a) In General.--Section 393A of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 280b-1b) is amended--
            (1) in subsection (b)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' at the 
                end;
                    (B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period and 
                inserting ``; and''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(3) the implementation of a national education and 
        awareness campaign regarding such injury (in conjunction with 
        the program of the Secretary regarding health-status goals for 
        2010, commonly referred to as Healthy People 2010), including 
        the national dissemination of information on--
                    ``(A) incidence and prevalence;
                    ``(B) secondary conditions arising from traumatic 
                brain injury upon discharge from hospitals and trauma 
                centers.'';
            (2) in subsection (d)--
                    (A) in the second sentence, by striking ``anoxia 
                due to near drowning.'' and inserting ``anoxia.''; and
                    (B) in the third sentence, by inserting before the 
                period the following: ``, after consultation with 
                States and other appropriate public or nonprofit 
                private entities''.
    (b) National Registry.--Part J of title III of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280b et seq.) is amended by inserting after 
section 393A the following section:

        ``national program for traumatic brain injury registries

    ``Sec. 393B. (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make 
grants to States or their designees to operate the State's traumatic 
brain injury registry, and to academic institutions to conduct applied 
research that will support the development of such registries, to 
collect data concerning--
            ``(1) demographic information about each traumatic brain 
        injury;
            ``(2) information about the circumstances surrounding the 
        injury event associated with each traumatic brain injury;
            ``(3) administrative information about the source of the 
        collected information, dates of hospitalization and treatment, 
        and the date of injury; and
            ``(4) information characterizing the clinical aspects of 
        the traumatic brain injury, including the severity of the 
        injury, the types of treatments received, and the types of 
        services utilized.''.

SEC. 1303. PROGRAMS OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    (a) Interagency Program.--Section 1261(d)(4) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-61(d)(4)) is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``degree of injury'' 
        and inserting ``degree of brain injury'';
            (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``acute injury'' and 
        inserting ``acute brain injury''; and
            (3) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``injury treatment'' 
        and inserting ``brain injury treatment''.
    (b) Definition.--Section 1261(h)(4) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-61(h)(4)) is amended--
            (1) in the second sentence, by striking ``anoxia due to 
        near drowning.'' and inserting ``anoxia.''; and
            (2) in the third sentence, by inserting before the period 
        the following: ``, after consultation with States and other 
        appropriate public or nonprofit private entities''.
    (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1261 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-61) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
    ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.''.

SEC. 1304. PROGRAMS OF HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION.

    Section 1252 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300d-51) 
is amended--
            (1) in subsection (b)(3)--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A)(iv), by striking 
                ``representing traumatic brain injury survivors'' and 
inserting ``representing individuals with traumatic brain injury''; and
                    (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``who are 
                survivors of'' and inserting ``with'';
            (2) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``, in cash,''; 
                and
                    (B) in paragraph (2), by amending the paragraph to 
                read as follows:
            ``(2) Determination of amount contributed.--Non-Federal 
        contributions under paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, 
        fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services. 
        Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services 
        assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal 
        Government, may not be included in determining the amount of 
        such contributions.'';
            (3) by designating subsections (e) through (h) as 
        subsections (g) through (j), respectively; and
            (4) by inserting after subsection (d) the following 
        subsections:
    ``(e) Continuation of Previously Awarded Demonstration Projects.--A 
State that received a grant under this section prior to the date of 
enactment of the Children's Health Act of 2000 may compete for new 
project grants under this section after such date of enactment.
    ``(f) Use of State Grants.--
            ``(1) Community services and supports.--A State shall 
        (directly or through awards of contracts to nonprofit private 
        entities) use amounts received under a grant under this section 
        for the following:
                    ``(A) To develop, change, or enhance community-
                based service delivery systems that include timely 
                access to comprehensive appropriate services and 
                supports. Such service and supports--
                            ``(i) shall promote full participation by 
                        individuals with brain injury and their 
                        families in decision making regarding the 
                        services and supports; and
                            ``(ii) shall be designed for children and 
                        other individuals with traumatic brain injury.
                    ``(B) To focus on outreach to underserved and 
                inappropriately served individuals, such as individuals 
                in institutional settings, individuals with low 
                socioeconomic resources, individuals in rural 
                communities, and individuals in culturally and 
                linguistically diverse communities.
                    ``(C) To award contracts to nonprofit entities for 
                consumer or family service access training, consumer 
                support, peer mentoring, and parent to parent programs.
                    ``(D) To provide individual and family service 
                coordination or case management systems.
                    ``(E) To support other needs identified by the 
                advisory board under subsection (b) for the State 
                involved.
            ``(2) Best practices.--
                    ``(A) In general.--State services and supports 
                provided under a grant under this section shall reflect 
                the best practices in the field of traumatic brain 
                injury, shall be in compliance with title II of the 
                Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and shall be 
                supported by quality assurance measures as well as 
                state-of-the-art health care and integrated community 
                supports, regardless of the severity of injury.
                    ``(B) Demonstration by state agency.--The State 
                agency responsible for administering amounts received 
                under a grant under this section shall demonstrate or 
                express a willingness to obtain expertise and knowledge 
                of traumatic brain injury and the unique needs 
                associated with traumatic brain injury.
            ``(3) State capacity building.--A State may use amounts 
        received under a grant under this section to--
                    ``(A) educate consumers and families;
                    ``(B) train professionals in public and private 
                sector financing (such as third party payers, State 
                agencies, community-based providers, schools, and 
                educators);
                    ``(C) develop or improve case management or service 
                coordination systems;
                    ``(D) develop best practices in areas such as 
                family or consumer support, return to work, housing or 
                supportive living personal assistance services, 
                assistive technology and devices, behavioral health 
                services, substance abuse services, and traumatic brain 
                injury treatment and rehabilitation;
                    ``(E) tailor existing State systems to provide 
                accommodations to the needs of individuals with brain 
                injury (including systems administered by the State 
                departments responsible for health, mental health, 
                labor, education, mental retardation/developmental 
                disorders, transportation, and correctional systems);
                    ``(F) improve data sets coordinated across systems 
                and other needs identified by a State plan supported by 
                its advisory council; and
                    ``(G) develop capacity within targeted 
                communities.'';
            (5) in subsection (g) (as so redesignated), by striking 
        ``agencies of the Public Health Service'' and inserting 
        ``Federal agencies'';
            (6) in subsection (i) (as redesignated by paragraph (3))--
                    (A) in the second sentence, by striking ``anoxia 
                due to near drowning.'' and inserting ``anoxia.''; and
                    (B) in the third sentence, by inserting before the 
                period the following: ``, after consultation with 
                States and other appropriate public or nonprofit 
                private entities''; and
            (7) in subsection (j) (as so redesignated), by amending the 
        subsection to read as follows:
    ``(j) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

             TITLE XIV--PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INJURIES

SEC. 1401. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR 
              DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

    Section 394A of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280b-3) is 
amended by striking ``and'' after ``1994'' and by inserting before the 
period the following: ``, and such sums as may be necessary for each of 
the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                   TITLE XV--HEALTHY START INITIATIVE

SEC. 1501. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Healthy Start Initiative 
Continuation Act''.

SEC. 1502. CONTINUATION OF HEALTHY START PROGRAM.

    Subpart I of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act, 
as amended by section 1203 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:

``SEC. 330H. HEALTHY START FOR INFANTS.

    ``(a) In General.--
            ``(1) Continuation and expansion of program.--The 
        Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health 
        Resources and Services Administration, Maternal and Child 
        Health Bureau, shall under authority of this section continue 
        in effect the Healthy Start Initiative and may, during fiscal 
        year 2001 and subsequent years, carry out such program on a 
        national basis.
            ``(2) Definition.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term 
        `Healthy Start Initiative' is a reference to the program that, 
        as an initiative to reduce the rate of infant mortality and 
        improve perinatal outcomes, makes grants for project areas with 
        high annual rates of infant mortality and that, prior to the 
        effective date of this section, was a demonstration program 
        carried out under section 301.
            ``(3) Additional grants.-- Effective upon increased funding 
        beyond fiscal year 1999 for such Initiative, additional grants 
        may be made to States to assist communities with technical 
        assistance, replication of successful projects, and State 
        policy formation to reduce infant and maternal mortality and 
        morbidity.
    ``(b) Requirements for Making Grants.--In making grants under 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall require that applicants (in 
addition to meeting all eligibility criteria established by the 
Secretary) establish, for project areas under such subsection, 
community-based consortia of individuals and organizations (including 
agencies responsible for administering block grant programs under title 
V of the Social Security Act, consumers of project services, public 
health departments, hospitals, health centers under section 330, and 
other significant sources of health care services) that are appropriate 
for participation in projects under subsection (a).
    ``(c) Coordination.--Recipients of grants under subsection (a) 
shall coordinate their services and activities with the State agency or 
agencies that administer block grant programs under title V of the 
Social Security Act in order to promote cooperation, integrity, and 
dissemination of information with Statewide systems and with other 
community services funded under the Maternal and Child Health Block 
Grant.
    ``(d) Rule of Construction.--Except to the extent inconsistent with 
this section, this section may not be construed as affecting the 
authority of the Secretary to make modifications in the program carried 
out under subsection (a).
    ``(e) Medically Appropriate Ultrasound Services; Medically 
Appropriate Services for At-Risk Mothers and Infants.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to health 
        care entities to provide--
                    ``(A) for pregnant women, ultrasound services 
                provided by qualified health care professionals upon 
                medical indication and referral from health care 
                professionals who provide comprehensive prenatal 
                services; and
                    ``(B) for pregnant women or infants, other health 
                services (including prenatal care, genetic counseling, 
                and fetal and other surgery) that--
                            ``(i) are determined by a qualified 
                        treating health care professional to be 
                        medically appropriate in order to prevent or 
                        mitigate congenital defects (including but not 
                        limited to spina bifida and hydrocephaly) or 
                        other serious obstetric complications 
                        (including but not limited to placenta previa, 
                        premature rupture of membranes, or 
                        preeclampsia); and
                            ``(ii) are provided during pregnancy or 
                        during the first year after birth.
            ``(2) Eligible project area.--The Secretary may make a 
        grant under paragraph (1) only if the geographic area in which 
        services under the grant will be provided is a geographic area 
        in which a project under subsection (a) is being carried out, 
        and if the Secretary determines that the grant will add to or 
        expand the level of health services available in such area to 
        pregnant women and infants.
            ``(3) Transportation and subsistence expenses for certain 
        patients.--The purposes for which a grant under paragraph 
        (1)(B) may be expended include paying, on behalf of a pregnant 
        woman who is in need of the health services described in such 
        paragraph, transportation and subsistence expenses to assist 
        the pregnant woman in obtaining such health services from the 
        grantee involved. The Secretary may establish such restrictions 
        regarding payments under the preceding sentence as the 
        Secretary determines to be appropriate.
            ``(4) Certain conditions.--A condition for the receipt of a 
        grant under paragraph (1) is that the applicant for the grant 
        agree as follows:
                    ``(A) In the case of a grant under paragraph 
                (1)(A), if ultrasound services indicate that there is a 
                fetal anomaly or other serious obstetric complication, 
                the applicant will refer the pregnant woman involved 
                for appropriate medical services, including, as 
                appropriate, for health services described in paragraph 
                (1)(B) provided by grantees under such paragraph.
                    ``(B) If the applicant provides nondirective 
                pregnancy counseling to patients and is not subject to 
                the condition under section 330F(b), such counseling 
                provided by the applicant to patients will include (but 
                is not limited to) the provision of adoption 
                information and referrals.
            ``(5) Relationship to payments under other programs.--A 
        grant may be made under paragraph (1) only if the applicant 
        involved agrees that the grant will not be expended to pay the 
        expenses of providing any service under such paragraph to a 
        pregnant woman to the extent that payment has been made, or can 
        reasonably be expected to be made, with respect to such 
        expenses--
                    ``(A) under any State compensation program, under 
                an insurance policy, or under any Federal or State 
                health benefits program; or
                    ``(B) by an entity that provides health services on 
                a prepaid basis.
            ``(6) Evaluation by general accounting office.--
                    ``(A) In general.--During fiscal year 2004, the 
                Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct 
                an evaluation of activities under grants under 
                paragraph (1) in order to determine whether the 
                activities have been effective in serving the needs of 
                pregnant women with respect to ultrasound services and 
                the other health services described in paragraph 
                (1)(B). The evaluation shall include an analysis of 
                whether such activities have been effective in reducing 
                the disparity in health status between the general 
                population and individuals who are members of racial or 
                ethnic minority groups. Not later than January 10, 
                2005, the Comptroller General shall submit to the 
                Committee on Commerce in the House of Representatives, 
                and to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
                Pensions in the Senate, a report describing the 
                findings of the evaluation.
                    ``(B) Relation to grants regarding medically 
                appropriate services for at-risk mothers and infants.--
                Before the date on which the evaluation under 
                subparagraph (A) is submitted in accordance with such 
                subparagraph--
                            ``(i) the Secretary shall ensure that there 
                        are not more than three grantees under 
                        paragraph (1)(B); and
                            ``(ii) an entity is not eligible to receive 
                        grants under such paragraph unless the entity 
                        has substantial experience in providing the 
                        health services described in such paragraph.
    ``(e) Funding.--
            ``(1) General program.--
                    ``(A) Authorization of appropriations.--For the 
                purpose of carrying out this section (other than 
                subsection (e)), there are authorized to be 
                appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of 
                the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
                    ``(B) Allocations.--
                            ``(i) Program administration.--Of the 
                        amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A) for 
                        a fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve up to 
                        5 percent for coordination, dissemination, 
                        technical assistance, and data activities that 
                        are determined by the Secretary to be 
                        appropriate for carrying out the program under 
                        this section.
                            ``(ii) Evaluation.--Of the amounts 
                        appropriated under subparagraph (A) for a 
                        fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve up to 1 
                        percent for evaluations of projects carried out 
                        under subsection (a). Each such evaluation 
                        shall include a determination of whether such 
                        projects have been effective in reducing the 
                        disparity in health status between the general 
                        population and individuals who are members of 
                        racial or ethnic minority groups.
            ``(2) Medically appropriate ultrasound services; medically 
        appropriate services for at-risk mothers and infants.--
                    ``(A) Authorization of appropriations.--For the 
                purpose of carrying out subsection (e), there are 
                authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
                necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 
                2005.
                    ``(B) Allocation.--Of the amounts appropriated 
                under subparagraph (A) for a fiscal year, the Secretary 
                shall make available not less than 10 percent for 
                providing ultrasound services under subsection 
                (d)(1)(A) (provided by qualified health care 
                professionals upon medical indication and referral from 
                health care professionals who provide comprehensive 
                prenatal services) through visits by mobile units to 
                communities that are eligible for services under 
                subsection (a).''.

        TITLE XVI--ORAL HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION

SEC. 1601. ORAL HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE
              PREVENTION.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 912 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317M the 
following section:

             ``oral health promotion and disease prevention

    ``Sec. 317N. (a) Grants to Increase Resources for Community Water 
Fluoridation.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may 
        make grants to States and Indian tribes for the purpose of 
        increasing the resources available for community water 
        fluoridation.
            ``(2) Use of funds.--A State shall use amounts provided 
        under a grant under paragraph (1)--
                    ``(A) to purchase fluoridation equipment;
                    ``(B) to train fluoridation engineers;
                    ``(C) to develop educational materials on the 
                benefits of fluoridation; or
                    ``(D) to support the infrastructure necessary to 
                monitor and maintain the quality of water fluoridation.
    ``(b) Community Water Fluoridation.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
        in collaboration with the Director of the Indian Health 
        Service, shall establish a demonstration project that is 
        designed to assist rural water systems in successfully 
        implementing the water fluoridation guidelines of the Centers 
        for Disease Control and Prevention that are entitled 
        ``Engineering and Administrative Recommendations for Water 
        Fluoridation, 1995'' (referred to in this subsection as the 
        `EARWF').
            ``(2) Requirements.--
                    ``(A) Collaboration.--In collaborating under 
                paragraph (1), the Directors referred to in such 
                paragraph shall ensure that technical assistance and 
                training are provided to tribal programs located in 
                each of the 12 areas of the Indian Health Service. The 
                Director of the Indian Health Service shall provide 
                coordination and administrative support to tribes under 
                this section.
                    ``(B) General use of funds.--Amounts made available 
                under paragraph (1) shall be used to assist small water 
                systems in improving the effectiveness of water 
                fluoridation and to meet the recommendations of the 
                EARWF.
                    ``(C) Fluoridation specialists.--
                            ``(i) In general.--In carrying out this 
                        subsection, the Secretary shall provide for the 
                        establishment of fluoridation specialist 
                        engineering positions in each of the Dental 
                        Clinical and Preventive Support Centers through 
                        which technical assistance and training will be 
                        provided to tribal water operators, tribal 
                        utility operators and other Indian Health 
                        Service personnel working directly with 
                        fluoridation projects.
                            ``(ii) Liaison.--A fluoridation specialist 
                        shall serve as the principal technical liaison 
                        between the Indian Health Service and the 
                        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention with 
                        respect to engineering and fluoridation issues.
                            ``(iii) CDC.--The Director of the Centers 
                        for Disease Control and Prevention shall 
                        appoint individuals to serve as the 
                        fluoridation specialists.
                    ``(D) Implementation.--The project established 
                under this subsection shall be planned, implemented and 
                evaluated over the 5-year period beginning on the date 
                on which funds are appropriated under this section and 
                shall be designed to serve as a model for improving the 
                effectiveness of water fluoridation systems of small 
                rural communities.
            ``(3) Evaluation.--In conducting the ongoing evaluation as 
        provided for in paragraph (2)(D), the Secretary shall ensure 
        that such evaluation includes--
                    ``(A) the measurement of changes in water 
                fluoridation compliance levels resulting from 
                assistance provided under this section;
                    ``(B) the identification of the administrative, 
                technical and operational challenges that are unique to 
                the fluoridation of small water systems;
                    ``(C) the development of a practical model that may 
                be easily utilized by other tribal, state, county or 
                local governments in improving the quality of water 
                fluoridation with emphasis on small water systems; and
                    ``(D) the measurement of any increased percentage 
                of Native Americans or Alaskan Natives who receive the 
                benefits of optimally fluoridated water.
    ``(c) School-Based Dental Sealant Program.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
        Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
        in collaboration with the Administrator of the Health Resources 
        and Services Administration, may award grants to States and 
        Indian tribes to provide for the development of school-based 
        dental sealant programs to improve the access of children to 
        sealants.
            ``(2) Use of funds.--A State shall use amounts received 
        under a grant under paragraph (1) to provide funds to eligible 
        school-based entities or to public elementary or secondary 
        schools to enable such entities or schools to provide children 
        in second and sixth grades with access to dental care and 
        dental sealant services. Such services shall be provided by 
        licensed dental health professionals in accordance with State 
        practice licensing laws.
            ``(3) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive funds under 
        paragraph (1), an entity shall--
                    ``(A) prepare and submit to the State an 
                application at such time, in such manner and containing 
                such information as the state may require; and
                    ``(B) be a public elementary or secondary school--
                            ``(i) that is located in an urban area in 
                        which and more than 50 percent of the student 
                        population is participating in federal or state 
                        free or reduced meal programs; or
                            ``(ii) that is located in a rural area and, 
                        with respect to the school district in which 
                        the school is located, the district involved 
                        has a median income that is at or below 235 
                        percent of the poverty line, as defined in 
                        section 673(2) of the Community Services Block 
                        Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)).
    ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term `Indian 
tribe' means an Indian tribe or tribal organization as defined in 
section 4(b) and section 4(c) of the Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act.
    ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

                TITLE XVII--VACCINE COMPENSATION PROGRAM

SEC. 1701. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program Amendments of 2000.''.

SEC. 1702. CONTENT OF PETITIONS.

    (a) In General.--Section 2111(c)(1)(D) of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 300aa-11(c)(1)(D)) is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
end and inserting ``or (iii) suffered such illness, disability, injury, 
or condition from the vaccine which resulted in inpatient 
hospitalization and surgical intervention, and''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes 
effect upon the date of the enactment of this Act, including with 
respect to petitions under section 2111 of the Public Health Service 
Act that are pending on such date.

                        TITLE XVIII--HEPATITIS C

SEC. 1801. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Hepatitis C and Children Act of 
2000''.

SEC. 1802. SURVEILLANCE AND EDUCATION REGARDING HEPATITIS C.

    Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 1601 of this Act, is amended by inserting after section 317N 
the following section:

        ``surveillance and education regarding hepatitis c virus

    ``Sec. 317O. (a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the 
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may 
(directly and through grants to public and nonprofit private entities) 
provide for programs to carry out the following:
            ``(1) To cooperate with the States in implementing a 
        national system to determine the incidence and prevalence of 
        cases of infection with hepatitis C virus, including the 
        reporting of chronic hepatitis C cases.
            ``(2) To identify and contact individuals who became 
        infected with such virus as a result of receiving blood 
        transfusions prior to July 1992 when the individuals were 
        infants, small children, or adolescents.
            ``(3) To provide appropriate referrals for counseling, 
        testing, and medical treatment of individuals identified under 
        paragraph (2) and to ensure, to the extent practicable, the 
        provision of appropriate follow-up services.
            ``(4) To develop and disseminate public information and 
        education programs for the detection and control of hepatitis 
        C, with priority given to recipients of blood transfusions; 
        women who gave birth by caesarean section; children who were 
        high-risk neonates; veterans of the Armed Forces; and health 
        professionals.
            ``(5) To improve the education, training, and skills of 
        health professionals in the detection and control of cases of 
        infection with hepatitis C, with priority given to 
        pediatricians and other primary care physicians.
    ``(b) Laboratory Procedures.--The Secretary may (directly and 
through grants to public and nonprofit private entities) carry out 
programs to provide for improvements in the quality of clinical-
laboratory procedures regarding hepatitis C, including reducing 
variability in laboratory results on hepatitis C antibody and PCR 
testing.
    ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.''.

            TITLE XIX--NIH INITIATIVE ON AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES

SEC. 1901. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``NIH Autoimmune Diseases Initiative 
Act of 2000''.

SEC. 1902. JUVENILE DIABETES, JUVENILE ARTHRITIS, LUPUS, MULTIPLE 
              SCLEROSIS, AND OTHER AUTOIMMUNE-DISEASES; INITIATIVE 
              THROUGH DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.

    Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by 
section 1002 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

                         ``autoimmune diseases

    ``Sec. 409E. (a) Expansion, Intensification, and Coordination of 
Activities.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Director of NIH shall expand, 
        intensify, and coordinate research and other activities of the 
        National Institutes of Health with respect to juvenile-onset 
        diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erthematosus, 
        multiple sclerosis, Sjogren's syndrome, scleroderma, chronic 
        fatigue syndrome, Crohn's disease and colitis (in this section 
        referred to as `autoimmune diseases').
            ``(2) Allocations by director of nih.--With respect to 
        amounts appropriated to carry out this section for a fiscal 
        year, the Director of NIH shall allocate the amounts among the 
        national research institutes that are carrying out paragraph 
        (1).
            ``(3) Additional diseases or disorders.--In addition to the 
        diseases or disorders specified in paragraph (1), the term 
        `autoimmune disease' includes for purposes of this section such 
        other diseases or disorders as the Secretary determines to be 
        appropriate.
    ``(b) Coordinating Committee.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
        committee to be known as Autoimmune Diseases Coordinating 
        Committee (referred to in this subsection as the `Coordinating 
        Committee').
            ``(2) Duties.--The Coordinating Committee shall, with 
        respect to autoimmune diseases--
                    ``(A) provide for the coordination of the 
                activities of the national research institutes; and
                    ``(B) coordinate the aspects of all Federal health 
                programs and activities relating to such diseases in 
                order to assure the adequacy and technical soundness of 
                such programs and activities and in order to provide 
                for the full communication and exchange of information 
                necessary to maintain adequate coordination of such 
                programs and activities.
            ``(3) Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be 
        composed of the directors of each of the national research 
        institutes involved in research with respect to autoimmune 
        diseases and representatives of all other Federal departments 
        and agencies whose programs involve health functions or 
        responsibilities relevant to such diseases, including the 
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and 
        Drug Administration.
            ``(4) Chair.--From among the members of the Coordinating 
        Committee, the Committee shall designate an individual to serve 
        as the chair of the Committee. With respect to autoimmune 
        diseases, the Chair shall serve as the principal advisor to the 
        Secretary, the Assistant Secretary for Health, and the Director 
        of NIH, and shall provide advice to the Director of the Centers 
        for Disease Control and Prevention, the Commissioner of Food 
        and Drugs, and other relevant agencies.
            ``(5) Full-time staff.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
        Coordinating Committee is staffed and supported by not fewer 
        than three scientists or health professionals for whom such 
        service is a full-time Federal position. The Secretary shall in 
        addition ensure that the Committee is provided with such 
        administrative staff and support as may be necessary to carry 
        out the duties of the Committee.
    ``(c) Advisory Council.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an 
        advisory council to be known as the Autoimmune Diseases Public 
        Advisory Council (referred to in this subsection as the 
        `Advisory Council').
            ``(2) Duties.--The Advisory Council shall provide to the 
        Director of NIH and the Coordinating Committee under subsection 
        (b) recommendations on carrying out this section, including the 
        plan under subsection (d).
            ``(3) Composition.--The Advisory Council shall be composed 
        exclusively of not more than 18 members appointed to the 
        Council by the Secretary from among individuals who are not 
        officers or employees of the United States. The Secretary shall 
        ensure that the membership of the Advisory Council includes--
                    ``(A) scientists or health professionals who are 
                knowledgeable with respect to autoimmune diseases;
                    ``(B) representatives of autoimmune disease patient 
                advocacy organizations, including organizations 
                advocating on behalf of diseases affecting small 
                patient populations; and
                    ``(C) patients and parents of children with such 
                diseases, including autoimmune diseases affecting small 
                patient populations.
    ``(d) Plan for NIH Activities.--
            ``(1) In general.--The Coordinating Committee shall develop 
        a plan for conducting and supporting research and education on 
        autoimmune diseases through the national research institutes, 
        shall review the plan not less frequently than once each fiscal 
        year, and shall revise the plan as appropriate. The plan 
        shall--
                    ``(A) provide for a broad range of research and 
                education activities relating to biomedical, 
                psychosocial, and rehabilitative issues, including 
                studies of the disproportionate impact of such diseases 
                on women; and
                    ``(B) establish priorities among the programs and 
                activities of the National Institutes of Health 
                regarding such diseases.
            ``(2) Certain elements of plan.--The plan under paragraph 
        (1) shall, with respect to autoimmune diseases, provide for the 
        following:
                    ``(A) Research to determine the reasons underlying 
                the incidence and prevalence of the diseases.
                    ``(B) Basic research concerning the etiology and 
                causes of the diseases.
                    ``(C) Epidemiological studies to address the 
                frequency and natural history of the diseases, 
                including any differences among the sexes and among 
                racial and ethnic groups.
                    ``(D) The development of improved screening 
                techniques.
                    ``(E) Clinical research for the development and 
                evaluation of new treatments, including new biological 
                agents.
                    ``(F) Information and education programs for health 
                care professionals and the public.
            ``(3) Recommendations of advisory council.--In developing 
        the plan under paragraph (1), and reviewing and revising the 
        plan, the Coordinating Committee shall consider the 
        recommendations of the Advisory Council regarding the plan.
            ``(4) Implementation of plan.--The Director of NIH shall 
        ensure that programs and activities of the National Institutes 
        of Health regarding autoimmune diseases are implemented in 
        accordance with the plan under paragraph (1).
    ``(e) Reports to Congress.--The Coordinating Committee under 
subsection (b)(1) shall annually submit to the Committee on Commerce of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Health, Education, 
Labor and Pensions of the Senate, a report that describes the research, 
education, and other activities on autoimmune diseases being conducted 
or supported through the national research institutes, and that in 
addition includes the following:
            ``(1) The plan under subsection (d)(1) (or revisions to the 
        plan, as the case may be).
            ``(2) The recommendations of the advisory council under 
        subsection (c) regarding the plan (or revisions, as the case 
        may be).
            ``(3) Provisions specifying the amounts expended by the 
        National Institues of Health with respect to each of the 
        autoimmune diseases included in the plan.
            ``(4) Provisions identifying particular projects or types 
        of projects that should in the future be conducted or supported 
        by the national research institutes or other entities in the 
        field of research on autoimmune diseases.
    ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2005. The 
authorization of appropriations established in the preceding sentence 
is in addition to any other authorization of appropriations that is 
available for conducting or supporting through the National Institutes 
of Health research and other activities with respect to autoimmune 
diseases.''.

 TITLE XX--GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS IN CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS

SEC. 2001. EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    Section 340E(f) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
256e(f)) is amended--
            (1) in paragraph (1)(A)--
                    (A) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the end;
                    (B) in clause (ii), by striking the period and 
                inserting ``; and''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
                            ``(iii) for each of the fiscal years 2002 
                        through 2005, such sums as may be necessary.''; 
                        and
            (2) in paragraph (2)--
                    (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the 
                end;
                    (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period and 
                inserting ``; and''; and
                    (C) by adding at the end the following:
                    ``(C) for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 
                2005, such sums as may be necessary.''.

  TITLE XXI--SPECIAL NEEDS OF CHILDREN REGARDING ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION

SEC. 2101. SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``Pediatric Organ Transplantation 
Improvement Act of 2000''.

SEC. 2102. ORGAN PROCUREMENT AND TRANSPLANTATION NETWORK; AMENDMENTS 
              REGARDING NEEDS OF CHILDREN.

    (a) In General.--Section 372(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 274(b)(2)) is amended--
            (1) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (2) in each of subparagraphs (K) and (L), by striking the 
        period and inserting a comma; and
            (3) by adding at the end the following subparagraphs:
                    ``(M) recognize the differences in health and in 
                organ transplantation issues between children and 
                adults throughout the system and adopt criteria, 
                polices, and procedures that address the unique health 
                care needs of children,
                    ``(N) carry out studies and demonstration projects 
                for the purpose of improving procedures for organ 
                donation procurement and allocation, including but not 
                limited to projects to examine and attempt to increase 
                transplantation among populations with special needs, 
                including children and individuals who are members of 
                racial or ethnic minority groups, and among populations 
                with limited access to transportation, and
                    ``(O) provide that for purposes of this paragraph, 
                the term `children' refers to individuals who are under 
                the age of 18.''.
    (b) Study Regarding Immunosuppressive Drugs.--
            (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
        (referred to in this subsection as the ``Secretary'') shall 
        provide for a study to determine the costs of immunosuppressive 
        drugs that are provided to children pursuant to organ 
        transplants and to determine the extent to which health plans 
        and health insurance cover such costs. The Secretary may carry 
        out the study directly or through a grant to the Institute of 
        Medicine (or other public or nonprofit private entity).
            (2) Recommendations regarding certain issues.--The 
        Secretary shall ensure that, in addition to making 
        determinations under paragraph (1), the study under such 
        paragraph makes recommendations regarding the following issues:
                    (A) The costs of immunosuppressive drugs that are 
                provided to children pursuant to organ transplants and 
                to determine the extent to which health plans, health 
                insurance and government programs cover such costs.
                    (B) The extent of denial of organs to be released 
                for transplant by coroners and medical examiners.
                    (C) The special growth and developmental issues 
                that children have pre- and post- organ 
                transplantation.
                    (D) Other issues that are particular to the special 
                health and transplantation needs of children.
            (3) Report.--The Secretary shall ensure that, not later 
        than December 31, 2000, the study under paragraph (1) is 
        completed and a report describing the findings of the study is 
        submitted to the Congress.

                  TITLE XXII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 2201. REPORT REGARDING RESEARCH ON RARE DISEASES IN CHILDREN.

    Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Director of the National Institutes of Health shall submit to 
the Congress a report on--
            (1) the activities that, during fiscal year 2000, were 
        conducted and supported by such Institutes with respect to rare 
        diseases in children, including Friedreich's ataxia; and
            (2) the activities that are planned to be conducted and 
        supported by such Institutes with respect to such diseases 
        during the fiscal years 2001 through 2005.

                      TITLE XXIII--EFFECTIVE DATE

SEC. 2301. EFFECTIVE DATE.

    This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect October 1, 
2000, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs 
later.

